I call this meeting of the South Portland City Council to
order on Thursday, March 19th.
May I have a motion to go into executive session? So moved by Councilor Matthews.
A second by Councilor Coleman. All in
favor? That is unanimous of the folks here.
Thank you so much.
Good
evening. I call this meeting of the South Portland City
Council to order on Thursday, March
19. If you wish to, please join me in
pledging allegiance to the Republic that is the United States of
America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of
America, and to the Republic for which it
stands, one Nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
Madam Clerk, may we have a roll call,
please?
Councilor Pride.
Here.
Councilor Matthews.
Yes, ma'am.
Councilor West.
Yes.
Councilor Coleman.
Here.
Councilor Walker.
Councilor Scott.
Yes.
And Mayor Tiffany.
Here. I think at this time we may have a motion
to make a change.
After the acceptance of the minutes.
You would prefer-
Yeah
... to accept the minutes. All right.
Can we accept our minutes by com- unanimous consent to any
changes suggested? No. The minutes are accepted by
unanimous consent. Thank you.
All right. Madam Mayor, I would like to make the motion to amend tonight's
agenda to move the order
11425/26, Conservation Commission
to action old and new business. Please and thank
you.
I will second that motion.
Thank you. Can we have a vote on that motion?
All in favor?
It's a unanimous vote.
You got all that, Madam Clerk?
Mm-hmm.
All right. Thank you very much. With that, we'll move to petitions and
communications.
You have the consent calendar to go through proclamations.
Oh, do we?
We're gonna hear it out of turn.
Okay. So that's going out of turn. All right.
Just kidding. We're now going to hear a different
matter.
Conservation Commission.
Um, what are we calling? The present- the presentations are
going first? Is that what you're telling us to do?
We wanted to hear the consent calendar items to do the proclamations before we did
petitions and communications for the Conservation.
Okay. Um, so do you wanna go through- Do
that?
That's what we-
Okay. Hang on for just one
sec.
So at this time-
Okay
... the council wanted to hear the consent calendar items for our two
proclamations prior to our petitions and communications.
So if the council wishes to do that, we will do that at this moment, and then we
will proceed with the agenda, petitions, and communications.
Okay. Do we need to vote on that or just say that's what we're doing?
That's- If that's what you wanna do, that's what we-
Yes
... mayoral decision.
That, a mayoral decision has been made.
We're moving forward that way. Thank you very much.
You are very
welcome.
Navigating multiple things.
Sorry. Bear with us. We did not dress rehearsal on this one
today.
That is okay.
So the first item on our consent calendar is our proclamation for recognizing Miss
South Portland.
We have Savannah Johnson here, who is our new Miss
South Portland. She is a business administration student from South
SMCC, and we wanted to recognize her this evening, so we do have a
proclamation to read in a moment.
Additionally, we have a proclamation recognizing our Jetport Noise Advisory
Committee member, Julia Shane, this evening for her dedication and work
towards the development of a flight, a flight tracking system
with the Jetport.
The additional items on our consent calendar this evening is to order number
112-2526 for our public arts appointment for
Allison Dale for District One, which expires on January 31st,
2029.
Order 161-2526
to set our fiscal year '27 budget public
hearing.
And order 162-2526 authorizing the temporary street
closure for Hinckley Drive on May 16th for the Spring
Fest from nine till four.
And order 163-2526...
Excuse me. Order 164-2526 approving the sale of land
identified on the tax assessor map 26 as part of the lots
16B and 16G at Elm Street and Forest
Ave.
And all items read on the consent calendar this evening require a majority
vote.
Okay.
All right. So are we gonna vote or
not?Okay.
Counselors, is there anyone who would like to remove anything from the
consent calendar at this time?
I do not see that. All right. So
generally before we vote on the consent calendar, we have a reading of our
rules for public comment. I think we're going to do that tonight.
Yes, ma'am.
The one thing that feels normal and that I got, actually got a handle on
it. Thank you.
You're very welcome. Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion part one or part two for up
to three minutes. If you are here to speak on an item that appears on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait until this comes up on the agenda, where you
will have three minutes to speak.
If you are unable to wait, you may speak on the item when it comes up for citizen
discussion part one. However, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic
again.
Members of the public who speak on a topic when it comes up on the agenda may not
speak on the topic again during citizen discussion part two, and we ask all
speakers to state their name and address for the record.
Okay.
Is there anyone who's with us who would like to speak, make a
comment on an item on the consent calendar?
Not on any other item.
Okay, don't see anyone who does that,
wants to do that, so we will vote on the items on the consent
calendar. Um, are we passing those by
unanimous consent? I don't see objections.
Do I see objections-
No
... Councilor Matthews? No. Okay.
So they are passed by unanimous consent.
Thank you very much. Those are our consent calendar items.
Now I think we're going to return to petitions and communications.
Are we doing that?
Yes, we will. Now that we have voted on the items on the consent
calendar, the city council will sign the proclamation, and we will present-
Okay
... Miss South Portland with her proclamation.
And we'll also invite Savannah as well as Miss Maine, who is here to
present her crown.
All right. We'll be passing this around, and thank you.
I, I think I can remember how to write my own name.
That'll be good.
I'm
gonna have to redo this
one. I'm sorry. There's a mistake in it.
So this is... Is the other one coming around?
It's right behind you.
Oh, yeah.
So at this time, while city council is signing the proclamation, I will
just read that for the members of the public who are here with
us. The Miss Maine Scholarship Program
serves as a beacon of empowerment, helping young women of Maine achieve their
educational and professional dreams through scholarship opportunities, personal
growth, and a commitment to excellence.
Whereas in preparation for the Miss Maine pageant, communities throughout Maine
hold local pageants
at which each young lady is chosen to represent their community in the hopes of
being selected for the twenty twenty six Miss
Maine. Whereas South Portland is bursting
with pride to welcome our new Miss South Portland, Savannah Johnson, who is a
trailblazer and brings her vibrant energy and Maine roots from
Gorham and Gardner to the heart of our city.
She's currently, as I mentioned earlier, excelling in her business administration
major at SMCC, right here in our backyard, and proving
her dedication to her academics and her community.
Are there two proclamations?
Do, do, do. And if my screen would like to go. There we go.
It's okay. I only-
Savannah draws her incredible strength and spirit from her family, Christine, Russ,
and her brother Shane, whose unconditional support has instilled in her the
powerful values of humility, resilience, and
heart. Inspired by her brother
Shane, Savannah has launched her impactful community service initiative, Everyone
Deserves a Place, championing inclusive organizations across Maine
and ensuring that individuals of all abilities have the opportunity to thrive and
shine. Whereas with a goal
to conquer the marketing world, Savannah embodies the confidence and
networking
prowess to foster the Miss America organization, paired with a genuine
passion for making every person that she meets feel welcome and seen and
understood. So now therefore, it be
proclaimed by the city council hereby officially recognizing and celebrating
Savannah as Miss South Portland. We honor her dedication
and inclusion, her happy, healthy, and purposeful driven mindset,
and her unwavering commitment to making South Portland and all of Maine more
welcoming place. At this time, I'll present the
proclamation to the mayor, so she can present it.
Might
be able to talk about it.
Okay. Thank you so much. Oh,
look. It's looking beautiful. Should I go right down the middle?
You can go right, yep.
Thank you.
If we can have
Miss South Portland and Miss Maine join the mayor up by the
lectern.
Yay.
Did you wanna say anything?
Yeah.
Did you wanna-
Sure.
Well, thank you, Savannah. Thank you for representing South
Portland. Thank you for being here. Thank you to Miss Maine.
We have the proclamation. Now all signed.
There it
is.
And also very good luck in your, you know, in all of your things.
Sounds like you're very busy woman.
I'd like to say a few words. So good evening, I'm Paige Lessard, your current
Miss Maine. I've been part of the program for the last twenty years, starting at
the age of five. I was in the mentorship program called Miss Maine Day
Pageant, which really led girls to compete for Miss Maine in the
future. I recently got to experience Miss America
firsthand, and that opportunity is one that I will cherish
forever. Miss America is actually the largest
scholarship provider for young girls in the country.
I've seen countless friends and peers
gain scholarships, go to Miss Mississippi State
University, Ole Miss, and University of
Alabama on a full-tuition ride because of the Miss America program.
I personally, just from competing, am able to graduate debt-free.
So I'm excited for Savannah to be able to compete for the
opportunity and to really be part of the sisterhood, and I would just like to
welcome you firsthand into the class of twenty twenty-six Miss Maine
delegates.
I'm gonna say something too. I just don't wanna
disrupt your, your state.
Well, hi, everyone. Good evening.
I just wanna start off by saying that I'm just so incredibly grateful to
officially now be representing an organization that, like Paige said, is one of the
greatest scholarship providers for young women in the country.
It's such an honor to be recognized by the South Portland community, and it's an
even bigger honor to be able to represent this amazing community
through my journey to Miss Maine. A few of you may know
that the Miss America has been around for about a hundred years now, and in those
one hundred plus years, there have only been three Miss Maine titleholders
from South Portland, and I think it's about time we make that statistic go up.
Speaking about statistics, a little
fun fact for those who also may not know, that it's actually been sta-
statistically proven that you are more likely to have a son
compete in the Super Bowl than you are to have a daughter compete at Miss America.
Crazy, right?
Even though I haven't competed at Miss America yet, I always am one to say
that just being a part of the Miss America experience can benefit
any woman, because I am living proof of that.
I started competing when I was fifteen, and at the time, this was right after
COVID, which as you can imagine, for a young teen like me, this was a
very hard time. I struggled with feeling invisible, and I was
even scared of my own shadow. But it-- Then I
discovered the Miss America organization and their five
pillars: style, scholarship, service, success and
sisterhood. And for the first time ever, I felt empowered
in a community. And that community aspect was
honestly what's kept bringing me back year after year.
And now as Miss South Portland, I wanna be able to be, to
use that as my marketing strategy
to promote the five pillars of the crown, to use that empowerment.
And,
I just forgot what I was gonna say. Um,
to use
that as my marketing strategy
and to use it to promote that marketing strategy to
others. And,
part of which also includes the promotion of my community service initiative.
It's called Everyone Deserves a Place, and it's inspired by the story and my
admiration of my older brother Shane and his journey to success and
confidence. It focuses on raising awareness
to,
organizations in Maine that focus on giving
people with disabilities the opportunity to thrive.
And, speaking of people that I admire,
I wouldn't be here today without the support of my village, so I
figured I'd end up this-- I'd wrap up this speech today by showing them a little
love. To our director, Juliana,
she is honestly one of the most helpful directors I've ever met.
She's the one who convinced me to come back to pageantry after I was about to take
a long hiatus, but that hiatus ended up being like a year and a half.
But I'm glad that I made the decision, all thanks to her.
And then to Paige, you're just such a light in this world, and it would be such an
honor to be able to lead into your footsteps or follow into your footsteps, and
you've just done such a great job at leading Maine and leading a great
example. And then to my family and friends, thank you for coming all this
way, even if it is a work night or a school night, or you have
to be in a whole other state by tomorrow.
Dad, Becky. And then lastly to the
So-South Portland City Hall Committee, I just appreciate your generosity
so much, and with all that you've done for me today, I know that I am sure to make
you proud at Miss Maine.
Thank
you.
All right, I'm gonna call this meeting to... Oh, never mind.
All right. I think thank you again.
Um, now we'll return to the famous and fabulous
petitions and communications.
Great. Uh, thank you, Mayor. Um, I, I do just wanna add, I have a former,
Gardner City Council member here who was actually one of the...
I, I won't call him out by name in case he doesn't want that, but, he was on
the original committee that hired me in my first city manager job in Gardner.
Probably some of you that wanna throw things at him for doing that, uh- ...
but, I just wanna recognize him for being here tonight.
With that, presentation, we have Aubrey Strauss, our storm wa--
storm water coordinator with Water Resource Protection, is here to provide an
annual update to the city council as part of the city's, MS-four
permit, Municipal Stormwater Permit.
Uh, this is a requirement that every year public officials be provided
with a program overview and update.
So Aubrey, the, the floor is yours.
Thank you, and I am gonna be so boringAfter a
while
Yeah.
So we drilled that down.
Miss Upland and Miss Main, that was your clue to leave.
Yeah.
Storm water.
We won't, we won't be offended.
We need storm water. We're good. We're done.
You don't have to.
Um, no, thanks for, thanks for getting us through the agenda.
I'm not gonna be talking about anything tonight that I think you guys haven't heard
before. What I would like to do is provide a basic refresher of the municipal
stormwater permit, that we are subject to, along with twenty nuh-
twenty-nine other towns and cities in this state.
Um, I'll start off with a really brief, framework, and I should only be about
fifteen minutes, which is, like, a nice bonus too.
Um, Clean Water Act at the federal level, requires
regulation of stormwater discharges.
In the state of Maine, Maine DEP is the regulatory authority.
They were delegated the ability to implement the Clean Water Act
by USEPA, but USEPA still has a small role in doing
oversight. Um, there are three major stormwater permits in Maine.
There's a municipal permit, which is what I'm gonna be discussing tonight.
We call that the MS4. There's an industrial permit, which is called the
MSGP, and there's a construction general permit, which is called the
CGP, 'cause we love acronyms. Um, right now, we are in the
fourth year of a five-year municipal stormwater
permit. Um, and I will tell you, it's very
exciting. We're gonna be audited.
Every one of the MS4 towns is gonna be audited within this
permit year, so it's the remaining year and a half.
Um, we're the first one, because new to this position, they thought,
"Let's, let's just see how she does." It's gonna happen in May, and you know what?
We're gonna be fine. We're preparing for it.
We have a lot of our documentation in, in, we have our documentation all put
together, and we know what to, to prepare for.
Um, but I wanted to just share that information with you.
So what does MS4 stand for? Again, it's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System, and there's nine core elements that are
called Minimum Control Measures.
Um, we'll talk about what those six Minimum Control Measure elements are in-- later
in the presentation. But what it means to be subject to this permit
means that we have additional scrutiny.
We and the other twenty-nine towns and cities have additional scrutiny on
us from Maine DEP, as well as EPA, who is still paying
attention, and environmental organizations and nonprofit community
organizations with an environmental focus.
It also means that we are spending more for stormwater
management and treatment and oversight than other regul--
non-regulated municipalities in the state.
Importantly, complying with this permit, this is the core of what my
job is, this requires a cooperation with a lot of
other staff and departments in the city, and I'm gonna show you why in--
during the rest of the slides. One last thing I'll mention is that our
deliverable, our key deliverable, is that every September, we deliver an
annual report to DEP that hits on the
elements that we are required to be doing every year.
So it's a sort of, sort of, like, giving them our report card and then inviting
them to provide feedback to us on what we need to be working on more, if
anything.
So what triggers coverage? I mentioned it's thirty towns.
Why these thirty towns? It's primarily based on
population density. The information comes from the US
Census. Um, right now, we are looking at a combination of,
the two thousand census and the twenty ten census.
So it starts with population density.
It pulls those, what are called urbanized areas, into clusters and looks at
overall population, and then it looks how close, how close those
areas are to other high-density areas in the
state. So, you know, there are a couple different clusters.
We are in the one that's called the Interlocal Stormwater Working Group, or
ISAWG. That's fourteen, essentially greater...
Yeah, ISAWG. We all have crazy names for our stormwater groups.
Um, it's fourteen other, essentially greater Portland communities that we get
together with. We work on, we work together on a lot of
elements, things that we can all share, so we really pool resources and do a lot
of things together. Um, we-- Right now, it may
look a little bit interesting on this map.
You may notice that Augusta is not one of these communities.
Because even though it has a lot of impervious area, it certainly has population
density in urbanized areas, it's not close enough to any of the
other urbanized areas to pull it in.
Sabattus is on the list. It's like a three-square block part of
Sabattus that has enough density, that's close enough to Lewiston and Auburn to
pull them in. So this is not a perfect
trigger to-- for, for managing communities, perhaps, and maybe
this won't always be what's used, the population density.
It may eventually change to something like impervious area, which may be a
more equitable way to apply these requirements to
towns. So I'm gonna start talking about the,
briefly, the six Minimum Control Measures.
Again, just to give you a refresher about what, my department in
conjunction with other groups and departments does.
The first, Minimum Control Measure or goal is education and
outreach. Two key parts. The first is general awareness.
What is stormwater? Where does it come from?
Is it treated or is it not treated? Where does it go?
What can I, as a citizen, do to protect stormwater and maintain water
quality and wetlands and, and natural resources?
The second part is more than just awareness, and it's behavior change, and
the element or the topic of that behavior change is different from
term to-- from permit to permit. This permit, the focus is on pet
waste management, and what we are required, each of these thirty towns
is required to do is, implement
programs and outreach messages to get people to
improve how much they pick up their pet waste, and we measure that by
having to do surveys every year. So there have been surveys every year,
and ideally, at the end of this permit term, we will find fewer
unpicked up piles of poop or poop bags than we did in the
beginning. So it may seem a little bit challenging, and it is
challenging, to get these done.
We rely a lot on the cou- the, S- Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation
District to help us with this, because we are not professional marketers.
We don't know how to, target messages to audiences and measure
that, so we really rely on assistance from that group to,
to-document the, messages and how
many people are clicking and liking and responding to things.
So that's, that's a big portion of what, of what the, the, the conservation
district does for the city and other groups.
The second is kind of similar, and it is actually involving the
public in what we do. So many of you know, we do lots of different
events over the course of the year.
We have a household hazardous waste collection event.
Public Works actually pays for that. It's in October.
Ideally, we would like to do two, one in fall and one in spring, but we get
such a big response at that fall event that we usually use the budget
that's allocated and haven't been able to have a, a spring event.
We-- That's a good, that's good in one way that we have such,
such participation, at that. Um, April Stools
Day event will be April eleventh this year.
We are gonna be at Willard Beach, so come down and see us.
Get some free dog treats and dog waste bags, and
meet me and, Maine DEP folks, and lots of other community
partners. So we-- And A-A-April, Earth Day events, there's lots of different
things that we do in the community to try to, engage
more one-on-one with our community members, that's residents and business
owners. This is the big one, MCM three,
illicit discharge detection and elimination.
This is looking for things that are going into the storm water system that aren't
storm water and that shouldn't be going into the system.
This can be obvious things like a house that has its sanitary sewer lateral
unintentionally going into the storm water system, which we don't see.
That-- But that's an example. Um, but it can also be,
dumping. It can be, a commercial business
that is sending a lot of detergent wash water into the storm water
system. That doesn't get treated.
That goes into a pipe or a ditch, and that goes into one of our rivers or
wetlands or into the ocean. So we spend a lot of work on
this, and there's a lot of things that we do to find these.
It includes, our, our collection system crew sending
cameras through the pipes to look for sources coming in and looking at the
condition of the pipe. Um, the bottom left-hand corner is, is a, a,
a photo is a thermal camera that I use to look for places in the
system where the water is warm. Storm water shouldn't least- shouldn't suddenly go
from cold in one catch basin to warm in another catch basin, and if it does, that
means there's a source of hot water coming in. What is that?
Um, we do outfall inspections. We do dye testing.
So there's a lot of different tools that we use to identify sources
of pollution coming into the system.
Our crew is really, really important at making that work.
The other element of the third MCM is that we have to
maintain and update a storm water infrastructure map.
This map is available to the public.
Um, it's got a really unpleasant long URL.
So what I would suggest if you wanna look at that is to Google South Portland
pipe infrastructure map. It has our storm water and our sewer
layers on it, and you could spend hours of joy,
hours of delight looking at the map.
When you do look at the storm water layer, you'll notice that we're in the process
of changing the s- the structures a little bit so that if it's blue,
that means it's a city structure or a city pipe, and if it's pink, that means it's
private. It's just a little bit easier for the, the public to sort of understand
what the city's responsible for and what may be their responsibility
or their subdivision's responsibility.
Fourth of the sixth is, of s- the six measures is construction
site runoff. So when projects are under construction,
we, Water Resources, and, and the field inspector
who's actually in the Public Works department, we're pulled into that if that
project has gone through planning board.
So anything that goes through planning board, whether it's a small project or a
large project, we are involved in doing, inspections for the
duration of construction. What we're looking for there is to make sure that
soil and other pollutants, for example, if there's on-site
fueling of construction vehicles, making sure that that m-- those
materials, that soil, isn't getting into our system, and it's not getting into
natural resources. Um, I've shown you on the screen here a few
images from the online inspection platform we use for this called Fulcrum.
We can do this on our phones, on our iPads, and it's instantly up in the cloud.
So if, if Eli Madsen in Public Works is out, and he's taking pictures of
something, and I'm in the office because I was lazy or whatever, I can see his
pictures right away, and I can give him immediate feedback on what he's seeing.
So it really works pretty well. Sometimes we'll use a third party for the,
this, these, construction site inspections.
Smaller projects that don't go through planning, those are still inspected by
code enforcement. So we work with code enforcement to make sure that the code
staff understand the expectation for what good erosion
sedimentation controls should look like, and so that they know
how to, how to interact with a contractor if something does need to be corrected
and how soon it needs to be corrected.
The fifth of the sixth MCMs is post-construction.
So once the project has been built, whether it's an individual business or a large
subdivision, if it's of a certain size, it
has to treat the storm water that's gonna be generated by the
project. If it's of a l- sort of little bit larger size project, it
also has to provide storage so that we're not creating
a lot of runoff that wasn't coming off that property before it was
constructed. So when we have those systems, which we call
BMPs, whether it's treatment or storage,
those have certain, inspection requirements.
We actually are-- In the city, we are capturing
projects. We are requiring treatment and/or storage on s-
construction, on new development and redevelopment, even above and beyond what
Maine DEP requires us to do. So that's great.
We're providing treatment on projects where the state necessarily
wouldn't require that. But once those are
built, they need to be inspected and maintained.
It does no good to build storm water treatment systems if you're never gonna
maintain them. So another part of what I do is I look at seventy different
parcels right nowAnd I reach out to them every year and I say, have you done
your inspection? If you did, was maintenance required?
Did you do it? And then we work together to make sure that they are maintaining the
systems like they should be. When we have properties that aren't compliant, I
work with code enforcement to reach out and get them to comply with that
requirement. We also, at the city level, the city has
55 of its own stormwater systems. Now, 39 of those are
city-owned. The rest of those are by the school department.
But as of this year, Water Resources is working to make sure that those are
inspected and maintained. So post-construction means
that there's going to be treatment or storage required on a
project. And it also means that we're tasked with making sure that that
continues to function after it's built and that those stormwater systems are being
maintained. The last one I'll talk about is pollution
prevention. So this applies to city-owned properties.
This is the municipal services facility, the transfer station, all
of our larger municipal properties.
What's involved is knowing what pollution sources are on the site.
It includes training. So we do cross-training with all the departments every
year. I've done it with most of the departments already this year, but I'll be
working with Public Works and Parks in April to do training with
them. It also means that every single
street is swept at least once a year.
What that does is pick up the sand and the grit and the trash and the leaves and
all the things that accumulate on the street, remove them from the street so
they don't get into the catch basins in the first place.
That's a Public Works function, and they do a great job at it.
My group inspects and cleans every single catch basin in the
city every year, which exceeds what DEP asks us to do.
That's 2,800 catch basins. Again, yes, thank you. Thank you.
I don't do it, but the crew does it, and they're fabulous.
All the material we take out of those catch basins means that material is
not getting into the water bodies.
So that's a not glamorous job, okay, but
it's very important to do. And we also inspect
every one of those when we do it. So we're looking for odors or sheen or
discoloration or foaming, which would be an indication that there's a
source of pollution coming in. So it's an important task for that reason as
well. Something else I'll mention about pollution prevention is the Public Works
Department is very involved in decreasing how much salt is being
put down for every storm. And that's a lot of different things that go into that.
There is annual training for all of the Public Works truck drivers,
the plow truck operators. But those trucks are also
calibrated so that they know exactly how many tons of salt are being applied
per lane mile. The settings are locked in so that they can't be
changed. The department pre-wets the salt by coating it
with a brine solution so that when the salt comes out of the back of the truck,
it doesn't bounce and go off the side of the road.
It sticks better on the roadway. It's not high tech, but boy,
does that make a difference in how much salt you're putting down.
We're also looking at new technologies.
We've together Water Resources and Public Works applied for a grant
for a new type of technology to pre-treat the road before a
storm event with liquid brine to prevent ice from forming in the first
place. So that will go very far to reduce the total amount of salt we
put down. So those are just some of the tools that we do and
some of the tools that we, some of the things that we look at at our municipal
facilities. And a lot of that we go through every year with the training and
just make sure nothing's changed at those facilities.
The last thing I'll talk about, and this is a new element of the MS4
permit, and that is our impaired waters program.
So in the city, unfortunately, we have five different streams that are considered
urban impaired streams. And that means that they've been
impacted by development. It means that there's more
impervious area that is in the watershed of those streams.
More impervious area means more pollution. It means more salt.
And when you have a lot of impervious area in a watershed, it's just
more stress on that stream. So we are required to look at each
one of those, assess what is causing those impairments, and then try to come up
with projects to mitigate those impairments.
Willard Beach was added to the list of impaired waters as an
impaired marine water in 2024. I think you know a
lot of, all know that we're doing a lot of work at Willard Beach.
And there's a two and a half hour presentation last week just on
Willard Beach. So I'll show you where to go to watch that if you want to.
So this is relatively new, but we have to come up with our, in our, in
the MS4 permit, we have to come up with a very focused list of projects that we're
doing for each one of those impaired waters. Here's a little bit of an update.
As of a few weeks ago, we've started updating the Trout Brook Watershed
Management Plan. Just yesterday, we had a meeting to select a consultant to
do a stream assessment and habitat assessment.
Barbary Creek, I will be approaching the Conservation Commission
and
submitting an application to do some sediment sampling in that stream
in 2026. Long Creek has its own watershed management
plan and a very active executive committee that
manages the work in that watershed.
And Fred has been a member, Fred Dillon has been a member of the Long Creek Board,
your chair of the Long Creek Board.
I mean, he doesn't wear a gold star, but he should, a little badge.
He's very involved in Long Creek Watershed restoration.
Red Brook, Scarborough's taking the lead on that, but we are
participating in that and providing monitoring data with our flow meters.
And Willard Beach, we will be applying for a Clean Water Act grant
to support the work that we are doing there in addition to some of the other
sources of funding that we're using.
The whole point of what I tried to get across tonight is that there are a lot of
different parts to complying with the MS4 permit.
And doing a good job with that is far more than just water
resources. It's far more than just our department.
It involves a lot of other departments.
It involves planning, which is how new development and redevelopment, they're
the ones that process those applications and pull us in for review.
It involves public works. It involves code enforcement.
It involves so many more people. And it involves the support of the city council
and the city manager. So we want to thank you for that.Um, and I think more
than anything, the new permit shows why that, that, that
intercooperation that between the different de-departments and staff
is, is, is more important than ever.
Fun stuff. I wanted to end with some fun stuff.
We have April School's Day coming up April eleven.
If you haven't heard about the screening of the film, unless something goes
terribly wrong, it's gonna be on April seventeenth at the high school auditorium.
There's brochure, there's flyers all over the place, so definitely come.
We hit two hundred and five tickets sold as of t-this afternoon.
So I mean, they're free, so I say sold, but- ... registered.
Two hundred and five seats taken. Um, we will be doing an open house
at our wastewater treatment plant the day after that, because we fired people up
with the film, and they're gonna wanna come see their own treatment plant.
That, the next morning, everybody is gonna be there.
It's gonna be amazing. We're gonna be at the Earth Day Resource Fair in Mill Creek
Park on the twenty-fifth, and then October tenth is gonna be the next Household
Hazardous Waste Collection Day. I put a little link in this presentation.
SPCTV has been filming all of the presentations that we've been doing
at the library on water quality. Again, they're two and a half hours each.
That's a long time to hear me talk. But they are actually a lot of fun, and it's
really engaging. We have a really good back and forth with the people who've
attended those, and it's, it's been really interesting.
I think you'll find it interesting.
And this is the flyer for the movie.
So we hope we see all of you at the film, and this is a good segue
into the next topic on the agenda. So I didn't wanna take a ton of your time, I
wanted to just do a refresher, but I would like to answer any questions you
have. If I said something that didn't make sense, if you want me to
repeat something, or if you have any other questions, I would love to take those.
Aubrey, thank you.
If that's okay.
Thank you so much. Um, you're such a good presenter.
We always enjoy learning from you. Thank you.
Glad to be here.
Do any of our counselors have questions for Aubrey?
Counselor West.
Just a quick question. What was the length of period of time that you
sampled the dog waste? I was so surprised to see two hundred and
forty-one samples of dog waste on the greenbelt.
That was one day.
One day?
One day.
Well, I hope we can educate-
That was one day. And most of those were unbagged.
F-I think four of those, somebody had taken the time to bag up the dog waste and
then left the bag.
Yeah. It-
So it counts. We still count it. Yeah.
I hope we can educate our community about that because that's a disappointment.
That's a happy task too, to go around and be counting dog waste poops on the app.
So that's quite, it's quite glamorous. Yeah, that's terrible.
And I think we have, we have seen an improvement, I will say.
So that's good. All right. Well, thank you very much
for, for having us on the agenda. And you know, we're welcome to...
Anybody's welcome to call and talk and ask questions. You know how to get us.
Thank
you.
Okay. We're gonna start our next presentation.
Thanks.
Did you-
Yeah. I just, introduce Fred Dillon, our Water Resource, Protection
Director. You're gonna hear from, him, our Finance Director, Ellen Sanborn, and
then, representative from CDM Smith, one of the consultants we've been
working on. Uh, this is in regard to the Pearl Street Pump Station project, to give
council an update, on where that's at, a timeline, and some,
preliminary information we have about, cost and impact to the sewer rates.
So Fred, take it away.
Thank you, sir. Yep. As, the manager said, Fred Dillon, the Director of
Water Resource Protection, joined by our Finance Director, Ellen Sanborn, and Adam
Simonson from CDM Smith, the firm that did the, the
financial feasibility study for us. So I'm just gonna provide some context.
Again, like, what Aubrey was saying, many of you are really familiar with what,
what we've done up until now with respect to Pearl Street, and sludge
dewatering is something I think maybe you've had some familiarity with as well.
I'll review those, briefly. Ellen will talk about the revenue bond
process, and then Adam will follow with the, discussion of the work that they
did on the, the financial feasibility analysis.
So first, Pearl Street. So there's a, kind of, an unflattering picture of Pearl
Street on, during the January twenty twenty-four floods.
Um, that's the current station as it, as it exists today.
And, and what we're planning to do is make improvements because of
the, the fact that it is... it's outdated.
It's, it's an aging pumping s-station that's been around for nearly fifty years
now. Um, we've spent a lot of money over the past three or four
decades, or three decades, I guess, doing a lot to separate and eliminate
the combined sewer overflows that we had.
And the combined sewer overflows are, are kind of discharge points, where when
there's a significant rain event, that rain will mix with the, the
sewage, overwhelm the piped infrastructure, and discharge these, these
points that were designed to, to release excess capac...
or to, to address the, capacity issues in our collection system.
Um, so we also have, along with the aging, pumping
station, there's a force main that crosses the, the flats of Antoine
Creek, and that force main is as old as the pump station.
Many of you may recall that, a few years ago, we had several force
main breaks in one of our older pumping stations, and we certainly would hate to
have something like that happen with Pearl Street.
That would be really catastrophic.
And then finally, we have a DEP requirement, our CSO Facilities Plan.
As part of that plan, the keystone, element of it is to upgrade
the, the Pearl Street Pump Station.
And what that upgrade will consist of is we currently have a, a pump station that
pr... that, that can accommodate up to forty- fourteen point
eight million gallons per day of flow.
To put that into some perspective that you might be able to understand more easily,
that's about twenty-two Olympic-sized swimming pools.
We'd upgrade that capacity to eighteen million gallons, which means we'd be able to
accommodate more flow in the collection system, so that, those CSOs would be
less likely to discharge, and that eighteen million gallons is about
twenty-seven, Olympic-sized swimming pools.
There's also this, facility we have that's called the headworks, and that
removes some of the more heavier, parti-waste products that are in the, in
the sewage before it gets to the wastewater plant.
That helps us maintain our equipment so that it's not being fouled up with the
stuff that's in the sewage. And then we currently have a-- that old, you know,
nearly fifty-year-old force main that's about, thirty inches in diameter
that runs across the flats. We're gonna replace that with two twenty-inch diameter
pipes, see if we can retain that thirty-inch, diameter pipe as well, so we have
triple redundancy. But at the very least, we'll have two brand-new pipes, and then
if that older pipe is still in good shape, we'll retain that as well.
And then finally, the station is gonna be built so that it accommodates sea level
rise as well. So we're elevating it so that it's up, up above critical
thresholds where it might be inclined to flood on, on those critical le-
storm events.
And we also have a sludge dewatering process upgrade that we're doing, and that,
upper photo, shows the, the current
belt filter process that we have. Those, those, pieces of equipment are
about thirty years old now, and they're increasingly becoming, more
expensive to maintain. Stuff is breaking down.
Um, and they also produce a sludge cake, so we have to remove water from our
sludge. And, and it's hard to put this into context, but sixteen percent
solids is kind of, um... It would be like a Red's Dairy ice
cream cone, I'd guess. It would be kind of-- It would slump a little bit, right?
Sorry, that's a really bad metaphor.
I think Red's is gonna sue you.
Maybe. Maybe. So at any rate, that's, that's-- So sorry, that was a, maybe a
bad analogy. But yeah. But what we would get with the new, the
new, centrifuges that we're planning to replace them with is something
that would be-- have, you know, kind of would be a, that would stand up better,
basically. And so when we, we have to haul this material, the more water that's
in the material, the more trips we have to make to, to transport it.
So there's a cost associated with that.
By having, sludge with higher percent solids, we would, we'll
reduce our transportation costs.
Um, so we're also gonna be, as part of the, sludge upgrade process, we're gonna
make some holding tank improvements.
Um, we're gonna make ancillary equipment, so that supports the, the belt filter
press pumps and stuff like that. And then our garage bay currently can only go in
one direction. There's only one entrance into it, so the, the big tractor-trailer
trucks that we have to, use to, dump our
dewatered sludge into have a really hard time backing in and out.
Now we have, we'd have, openings on both ends, so they could just drive
straight through. And so what all this adds up
to, it's a, it's kind of a, it's a, it's a staggering amount, or it's
a big, a really big amount. Uh, with the Pearl Street Pump Station,
project, the construction estimate is thirty-two point eight million.
The indirect project cost associated with that, about six million, for a total
of, of nearly thirty-nine million dollars for, for, for Pearl Street.
Um, the sludge dewatering project would be for construction, about eleven
million. The indirect cost associated with that, about one point seven
six, for a total of twelve point eight or thereabouts, for a total
combined project cost for those two of fifty-one point seven
or fifty-one point six eight, million dollars.
So that's, you know, it's a, it's a lot of money. We realize that.
Um, and so we have a project timeline now for both of
those. Today, we actually released the bids for the Pearl Street
project, and, and we'll be, opening them in
April. And, and then in the, in,
at, at the same time, we're developing this, dewatering project preliminary
design report. That should be ready by, by April as well.
By June second, we'll be coming back to you again to talk about potentially getting
these revenue bonds, which Ellen and, and, Adam will talk about more.
And then in July, we hope to do stuff, the procurement process for dewatering
equipment, so that we can have that lined up in, in, in time for
that project. And then in August of twenty twenty-six, we'll have
hopefully the final design for the dewatering project.
And actually, I should also, give a shout-out to Megan McDevitt from Worley
Parsons. She's been fantastic to consult for us, and she's been doing
m-much of the work that's going on behind the scenes.
And she and her team have been really great to work with, so.
Um, in September of twenty twenty-six, we'll, we'll hope to, to
start the construction process for the Pearl Street project.
In January, we'll open the bids for the dewatering project of, of twenty
twenty-seven. And in June, we hope to start the, June of twenty twenty-seven,
we hope to start the construction project.
And I think with that, I hand it over to
Ellen.
Hi, I'm Ellen Sanborn. I'm the finance director for the city.
Uh, I've been working with Fred and Adam on this for a while now.
Um, so just to preempt what we're gonna come back in
June and talk about the issuance of revenue bond, we hired CDM
Smith, to do a financial feasibility study for us because these are
revenue bonds, which means the revenue from the sewer fees has to
pay the debt service, and that's our guarantee.
There's no tax money going into this.
There's no guarantee of tax dollars like there is with general obligation
bonds. So it requires proof, by
someone other than just us saying so that we're gonna be able to pay for these
if we issues this debt. So there's a lot of pieces that go into that to prove
that. Um, and that's what Adam and his team have been
sort of projecting and putting together models for, and we've been doing a lot of
back and forth on that. Um, the user
increase from, for three years is estimated to be
about twenty-two percent a year, not including the
regular operating increases for Fred's operation.
This is just to cover the debt and all of the requirements that go with
that. Um,
some of these I didn't write myself, so I'm reading and talking at the same time.
Um, WRP is planning more large capital projects.
So they, in the CIP that you get as a seven-year plan, you'll see some of the
projects in the outer years maybe.
Um, they have, as you know, significant infrastructure to maintain, so
this won't be just a one-and-done project, and then, you know, fifty years from
now, we'll do another one. There's some other things that are gonna be coming,
in the future. We also have our financial advisor, Moores &
Cabot, and bond counsel, Jim Safian, who you guys are familiar with,
that works with us on this process, especially as we go through the revenue bond
process. Um-
Um, what is next? Here. Before I get to this
one, the general process of revenue bonds is we
will go through a rating process. They're rated differently than our GO bonds.
Our FA and the legal counsel, as well as
probably CDM will participate in that discussion.
Um, it's a little different than just a regular rating for GO bonds.
So it is a big effort to, again, prove that we can pay
for what we're asking to borrow. And I will add that South Portland
doesn't have a lot of debt outstanding, as we all know from recent conversations.
The biggest one is the school. Um,
and so we don't go to the market that often with these types of projects.
So it's gonna be important that we can demonstrate our ability to pay for this.
So the estimated impact, based on the models that CDM has done
in FY27, the twenty-two percent basically equates to about nine dollars and
seventy cents a month, or a hundred and sixteen dollars a year.
And then in '28, there's another eleven eighty a month, or a hundred and forty-one
dollars a year. Um,
we are, I will add, Fred mentioned we put out the bid for Pearl Street
recently. It's coming back at the end of April.
We're doing that ahead of the need to borrow money in order to see
if the price is coming in less, hopefully not more.
Um, it's a little more volatile of a pricing
effort to price Pearl Street than it is dewatering. That's simpler.
It's, it's equipment and some installation and stuff.
So we wanted to have that number before we ask to borrow money so that we're
sure that we're borrowing the right amount.
Um,
so
these impacts are large, and we've been talking about it for a while.
I will say that I'm surprised it's as, as less as it
is. I expected it to be a little more.
Um, so we realize that it impacts everybody, residents and commercial
businesses. There's a lot of businesses.
A few of them are already asking, "What is this gonna be?
What is this gonna look like?" Because they have much larger water and sewer bills
than we do personally. So we're gonna be putting some of that
together, with some information that Fred's gonna get from the Water District,
and start reaching out to some of those guys and start talking about, you know,
"This is the expected impact that's coming for you, in the
near future." Um, the other thing that Fred and his team are working on
is looking for grants to mitigate the impact and reduce the
cost to the city and the tax- and the rate payers.
Um, there's a request for twelve million dollar for an earmark, or
what used to be called an earmark. I don't know what it is now.
Um, we're gonna be looking at if there's any TIF funds available maybe to help with
the debt service and things like that.
So again, the final ask in June might be different than the
total cost of what you're seeing.
So we've talked about this through every budget process that I've been involved in,
that we have experienced the low- some of the lower sewer rates,
in the region for a number of years,
and that's still the case. And this is the chart that demonstrates
that.
And
I'm not exactly sure why we focus on Cape Elizabeth and stuff.
I think they have the highest rate that we compare to, and so we're almost fifty
percent less than they are. Um, and lower, as I said
before. So you may have seen recently there's been articles about
other communities that are dealing with some pretty significant sewer increases,
sewer rate increases because of infrastructure issues.
Um, and
people don't think about what's in the ground when they flush the toilet, but there
are a lot of things going on when you flush the
toilet. And that infrastructure to take care of it is old and
aged, not just in South Portland, but in a lot of communities around.
And it costs a lot of money to fix those as we go forward.
So we're not alone in this. Um,
there's some examples here of Richmond and Winthrop and Bar Harbor and some
other places.
So, as I just said, the
mid-seven- 1970s wastewater systems that are now failing and
need to be replaced, we had a lot of water main breaks
recently, over the last summer on Main Street.
I think some of you guys remember, like every other day, there was a shutdown
because of water main break or, or there was a force main break.
Um,
so this financing that we're gonna do and this debt we're issuing will likely put
us at the top over the next three years of,
the rates as they look today. But as these other communities start to
invest in their infrastructure, we're gonna end up being
somewhere in the middle probably.
And there's a, there's a chart on that as we go forward.
Um,
where is the chart?
There it is.
Adam's got that chart. That shows that over time, if we did it
today, we would be higher after three years than anybody else if everybody stayed
in the same place. But they're gonna have the same kinds of investments going
forward, and there's some estimates in here from the Water District about what's
planned for the infrastructure improvements and where we're gonna end up in
three years compared to them, so, which Adam will show
you.
Great. Thanks, Ellen. Good evening, councilors.
Uh, Adam Simonson from, CDM Smith.
Uh, so what-- I wanna just walk you through a little bit the, what the
feasibility study process looks like and then what, what the outcomes are,
where, where, where we've landed at the moment, right?
So as, as reve-- as Ellen and Fred said, to
support these projects, it's gonna require revenue bonding, which has
not been something that's historically that the city's done.
Those, those revenue bonds, require not only repayment of the debt
service, but will also have new bond covenants associated with them
that has financial impacts that we'll talk about.
Currently, to keep the project schedule,
on the schedule that, that Fred outlined, the city would be looking at
issuing these revenue bonds, sometime early in fiscal year
'27, so probably in the fall or,
so. Um,
so in terms of how do we, how do we look at this financial
fe-feasibility, which ultimately, is
steering towards the need for increased revenue or rate increases,
um-is to undertake this financial feasibility
analysis. The end report that we do will become
part of the offering documents, become part of the public offering documents for
the sale and the marketing of those bonds.
We
did use a
draft 27 fiscal budget in there. So
as that changes and moves a little bit, these numbers
would likely move and adjust as part of that.
We've tried to be as conservative as possible in those assumptions, which is really
also part of what the market requires.
So
it's projecting future O&M and debt service.
It is making use of the existing fund balance that
the
wastewater fund has today to help mitigate future rate increases.
But as I said, it's conservative. It's not assuming any growth over
time. So as
you have more growth and more customers, more people to share in fixed
costs, that puts downward pressure on rates.
But we're not making any growth assumptions in
here. The bond covenants that
the city is going to have to work within are debt service coverage
ratio, essentially of 1.25. So
essentially what that's saying is that you have to have
25% more cash on hand after you pay your
operating expenses than is needed to pay the debt, right?
So it forces you to build a reserve in and it'll be a covenant
that's part of that revenue bond. From a marketability
perspective, what the financial advisor has said is that the
market's going to want to see days of cash on hand really equivalent to
a year of your operating fund, which is you're not carrying that
level of days of cash on hand today.
And the debt that we're going to talk about in here has been structured such that a
30-year term for the pump station and a 20-year term
for the dewatering of the ponds, which really ties
back to what the useful life of those assets are because you usually want to try to
tie the debt to how long the asset is
useful for. And 30 years is about as long as you're going to be able to
do out in the market there. So
the kind of quick summary of this, if you look at this chart, so all the way
over on the left shows fiscal year 26.
The purple line across the top shows your current revenues based on current rate
and what the projections are. So you see for this year, you're projected to have a
very small surplus, right? The blue bar represents
O&M costs. And so you see going forward, projecting through
2031, very slight increases in
O&M that are essentially just driven by inflation.
The green bars at the top are the normal
day-to-day cash-funded capital investments that the
wastewater division makes as part of the regular course of
business. And you see that that is projected to stay pretty stable
through the projection period. Where it really changes is when you look at the
debt service and the bond covenant
pieces that show up in orange there.
And so since the city's planning to issue the debt in fiscal
year 27, in fiscal year 27, you only have to make a single
interest payment. But then starting in fiscal year 28, you'll have a
full year of debt service
payment in there for those. And so you see that the summary of
that is that revenues for the Water Resource Protection
Division have to raise about
75%.
Oops.
So in terms of how to try to manage that in rates, right?
And this is part of what we've been working with the team there and thinking about
how do you do this in a way that mitigates these rate impacts
as best as possible. So
what we're
suggesting is that you would want to smooth those rate increases over time to
minimize the impact as much as possible.
We did work with the financial advisor to essentially
confirm and understand that this cash on hand requirement of
365 days can be ramped up over time.
So it's not
like in fiscal 27, the need is to immediately raise all this extra
cash to have on hand in a reserve. You can slowly ramp that up over a
five-year period. And then what's also important with this
is, as Fred was kind of hitting on, is beyond
2031, there's other large capital projects in
the hopper that most likely will also require, will need to be
debt financed. And so you want to be in a good position five years
from now to try to be able to start taking on some of those projects without
further dramatic rate increases.
So when we get into the
nuts and bolts of what some of that looks like and how the rate might
change, as Alan was saying,
essentially, you've got a small increase, 4%
increase that's on the O&M side. And
then the majority of the increases, right, of what we're seeing is
essentially an additional 22% a year increase for the next three
years is needed, bringing the rate from
$7.38, what we're
projecting, up closer to $14.76 right
now. And the
graph, which you're looking at there, again, the blue is sort of just those regular
O&M costs and combined with that normal capital
spending. And the orange is really the impact of the revenue
bonds needed for these two projects.
So then when we look at how does that actually compare to
surrounding communities.
And so PWD, as part of their
budget books and what they publish, projects out for these
communities based off their known capital spending and the projects that they
have, where do they expect to see the
average billGo over these, th-
over this period of time. And so the dark blue that you're looking at, right,
is what does it look like today, right?
And then those various shades of blue as you walk out in the fiscal, the
other fiscal years there. So what, what we're looking at and what we're expecting
here ... So today, South Portland has, of these surrounding
communities, has the lo- has by far the lowest rates.
Um, what we expect is, is that as you get closer to, to FY
'29, it will still be one of the lowest rates in those
communities. It'll, it'll probably be, you know, somewhat equivalent with Westbrook
and Gorham. These is, these numbers though also exclude
... These are only what PWD, would charge.
So for some of these communities, they have their own sewer charges as
well too. So again, this is a little conservative.
But we think at the end of this projection period, while rates are gonna increase
quite a bit, you're still gonna be, in t- terms of the surrounding communities,
you're still gonna be, the most
affordable. I think that wraps up,
yeah. So, sort of bottom line, what we're
looking at is, is saying to be able to market and sell these bonds, the city is
gonna have to increase rates. It's gonna have to apply to all
users, in the system. Uh, we recommend
that you smooth those rate increases as much as possible,
and, while doing that to maintain, what you need to from
a bond covenant perspective there.
So I think, you know, questions for Fred and Ellen and I.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah.
I just, I first would like to say it's a lot of information.
It's important information, and I thank you three for bringing it
to us. Um, we won't have a discussion per se, but we
are ... The councilors can ask questions.
Councilor Scott.
Um, I had two questions. What is the typical bond rate
or, like, cost of capital for the-
I mean-
... capital improvements?
Yeah, it varies a lot, and I'm not a, I'm not a registered municipal financial
advisor, and that's really a Moores & Cabot question of where you-
I just wonder if you have a range.
Yeah, the range right now, I mean, you're sitting somewhere,
GO debt. I mean, Ellen, I don't know what you guys have last issued on it.
Yeah, I think-
I think the-
So these are rated differently than-
Yeah
... general obligation bonds. So I think you've gotten information before that one
of, we're one of the highest rated communities in the state.
I would expect to be in that same condition if we do our job right
and we can prove to the market that we can do it.
So I'm hoping for a highly rated
bond issue for this revenue bond, but they're rated differently.
They use different metrics and all kinds of things.
So
since we haven't issued revenue bonds, there's no prediction as to what that's
gonna look like. I think it's the same rating scale as
just, you know, there are As and Bs and pluses and minuses.
But other than that, I think
... Does that answer your question?
I guess I was wondering if there is, like, a percent of, like,
if you're gonna go get a mortgage, it's 6%
or ... You know what I mean? What's the-
Oh, interest rate?
Yeah, yeah. What's the bond interest rate?
Oh, when you said rate, I guess we interpreted it to be rating.
Yeah. No, I know. Sorry. Used the wrong, wrong rate word.
Yeah. The general rule is that it's about 1%
higher than a general obligation bond rate.
So if bonds now are 4.5, 5%, it would be 5.5, 6%.
That's just-
Okay
... the rule that I've always kinda used.
It can obviously be different, but it is higher, because they're taxable bonds.
Yeah.
Okay. And then my second question was, and sorry, I haven't
gone through the green binder, which I know is in my
email as well. Um, but
do we have or is there a plan, and maybe this doesn't work
as well with revenue bond type arrangements, but is there any sort
of reserve account that we do fund
out of that
sewer revenue just to build a reserve?
And again, new councilor, just asking bigger questions.
Well, it's, it's a valid question.
But-
It's a question that I kinda had when I got here.
Um, so because the sewer fund is
self-sustaining, right, it lives off its own fees, then everything it pays
for needs to come out of those fees.
There are reserves, that have been set over the
years. The complication for us is, or I guess the challenge for us
is there wasn't, a specific effort to
build them up in anticipation of these kinds of projects.
So the reserves that we have are, like, emergency, you know, if
something falls apart. And I think you've seen some of those, 'cause Fred's come to
you to ask for an appropriation for Main Street last year, right?
Like, "We gotta fix this, and it's $700,000, and we're gonna take it out of
reserve." Um, same with fund bal- They do also have a fund balance within the sewer
fund, primarily more towards the operating
days on ca- cash on hand and, you know, policy to have things available if
something fails. But there hasn't been enough buildup to
really put a dent in this kind of
cost, and that's kind of what Adam was alluding to, that as we increase
rates and as we structure this rate a little differently, and you can see there's a
difference and we need to demonstrate that this is what you pay for to operate the
system, and this is what we're paying for for capital and debt service,
and that we can maybe build some more capacity so in the future we don't have
to do as much financing for some of these things.
So yeah, it's, it's should be part of the rate that you're putting
money away for your capital plan, which
practically could go more than seven years for that rotation in order to do that
planning. I mean, the seven years that we present, but Fred could certainly have a
15-year plan, which he may have, or he may have at the end of this process
anyway. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you so much. I would
appreciate that.
Councilor West.
Um-
It is impressive that even after these calculations and this, large
bond issuance, we would have less, of a
sewer rate that's one of the lowest in the area.
But I, I wanted to ask about the TIF.
And when you're factoring, there's a reference in the staff report to using
TIF funds to somehow reduce the cost.
Is that factored into what you said tonight, the use of some TIFs?
No, none of the earmarks or TIFs or any of that, we
haven't gotten to that place yet. So once we get-
Yeah
... bids back for Pearl Street, and once we kind of have a better handle on the
cost, and we're gonna have some more discussion about that to see if some of
that can be used for those purposes.
We me- done some amendments to TIF recently, so we really gotta go through and see
what might be available. And with- ...
recognizing that there are other, you know, things that people wanna spend
TIF money on, so.
Yeah, that would be a decision of the council too.
Yeah.
That'd be something-
Yeah
... we've obviously brought to you all.
Yeah.
Yeah, it would seem to me that given the, what the chart shows about the rates
compared to our peers, that going with your model that you have in
place is the best model to pursue.
Councilor Matthews?
So I guess I'm gonna pretend I'm the public watching right now,
and I see that my sewer rate is gonna go up
double, basically, over three years.
How confident are you guys that you're accurate
and my
rate isn't gonna go up 70 or
80%? I mean, are you, w- it just
seems to me, at 51 million, my
rate only going up the first year is only $9.
And it j- something doesn't jive in my head with these numbers
right now. And
how confident are you guys that
you're on, you're on spot?
So I can let Adam maybe talk how confident he is.
But I will say that we've been very conservative in all of our
estimating. Um, it is important to know, which he did, that that first
year looks weird, like it doesn't look like enough, but it's because we only have
one interest payment that year, 'cause we'll sell bonds in the fall, so we'll only
have one payment. It'll take another year for the rest of that to kick in.
Um, he also mentioned that there are no estimates for growth in here.
There's no additional rate payers estimated.
It's whatever we have for capac- for, consumption right now, and
that's not likely to happen. There's a lot of things going on, as you all know,
where there's gonna be more development, residential, and maybe
commercial, where there's gonna be additional rate payers participating in
that, and we will reevaluate this every year. So I'll also say this is an estimate.
The first year is the only one we're sure about, that we have to do that to
start. Next year we'll have the model, we'll be reevaluating.
It may be less than 22%. I'm hoping it is.
I mean, that, that can happen easily if we get more people paying into the
system. Um, and the same thing with the third year.
So I'd say this is... I mean, Adam can disagree with me
if he feels differently. Where did he go?
I think he's right here.
He left already. Um, I feel pretty
good.
So now, like, is it safe to say in a month when we have the bid results, the, I
mean, that'll essentially determine, right, the-
Well, that'll determine the, whether the three years changes.
Yeah.
But what I'm saying is, once you get past the first year, and you, 'cause every
year you reevaluate your, your rate, right? You set the rate every single year.
And so next year when we set the rate, if our consumption has gone up and we have
more people in the system, the rate might be 19%. You know what I mean?
It, it's gonna be different. Or, you know, we had a really good place
to... We're down on sludge and we don't spend as much money, and so the budget next
year isn't a 4% increase. So there's all those things that can impact us, and I do
think, we spent a lot of time doing this, and I think we're as
conservative as we can be at this point.
All right.
Best I can tell you.
Adam, you wanna add to that?
I, I mean, I would j- I, I would just add, I mean, I agree with Ellen.
I mean, every step of the way what we have tried to do is to be
very conservative in these assumptions on here, right?
So that we're, we're hopefully, if it's gonna go
anywhere, if it's gonna change from what we're presenting
here, it's likely to be less.
Mm.
We know where we can find you.
Well, you know, and the big, the big caveat on that, right, is, and this
is, this is part of where I think it was a, a smart decision on their part,
was to, was to work hard on the bid process for
the, for the Pearl Street pump station, right?
'Cause that's the largest chunk of cost on this.
And so what do we have? Because we're gonna,
the city's gonna get the prices for that within the next two months-
Mm-hmm
... right, that's gonna add a whole bunch of price certainty to,
to, to all of this. So I think when it comes time to actually approve the
rate increases, you're gonna have, or we're gonna be able to talk with a much, much
higher degree of certainty than, than we are today.
Thank you. Councilors, are there, knowing that
more information is coming, are there any other questions we need to ask
tonight? I don't see any.
Thank you again. Thank you very much.
Um, we're going to move to our appointment calendar.
Uh, I do not see any objection to postponing the appointment
calendar to our next business date.
Any objections? No. Okay. That takes
us to our first sec- session of
open public comment.
I think you remember that we have three minutes for
public comment on an item on or off the agenda.
If it's on our agenda, generally we prefer you wait
until we get to the agenda item. Um,
you can please say your name. You can say the street that you live
on. You don't have to give your address. Do we have...
Oh, and you will see your three-minute timers on our
screens. Do we have someone who would like to make public
comment?
Thank you.
Good ev- good evening. Uh, my name is Tim Honey.
I'm coordinator of Toss the Tanks campaign.
I will be very brief. I have copies of my
testimony and an attachment with it, which I believe here.
And so
I just wanna say that-We at Toss the Tanks
are convinced after the year that we've been working
on this, that there is broad, broad community
support for the Hill Street Tank Farm redevelopment
project. And we're very pleased that that's reflected in
the comprehensive plan, and we're really pleased that it's,
reflected in the goals document.
We have two things that I just wanna call your attention to
that are really important, and it's in, in the letter.
Um, and that is we think it's very
important for the city... Toss the Tanks is an
advocacy agency. We can't, a- a- a- umbrella.
We can't do implementation, so we, we, we
really need the city
to send another letter to Suncor
and
have, have them come to the table to talk
about plans for the future of the Hill Street Tank
Farm. And you gotta get them to the
table or nothing is going to happen.
So we have a draft letter here that you may wanna
use. I think there are a couple of other drafts that are floating around.
Um, but please, please send that letter.
And then the second thing that would be very, very helpful, if
the city manager could designate a person in the
organization that is trying to keep track
of what is going on, so when the city, it's time for the city
to take additional action, there's a point person in the
city that is trying to keep on top of that.
We're not gonna, we're not gonna disappear.
We will offer, work in terms of doing
research and volunteering, but we can't step in and
be the city. We're an advocacy nonprofit
organization, and only the city can have
the, the, ability to do things like
be, get, get Suncor to, to the negotiating
table. So, with that, I thank you very
much, and I will
leave the copies of
my testimony, and
what we would like you to do with, uh-
I can take those, Tim.
Yeah. There.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Thanks.
All right. Thank you so much.
Further public comment?
Good evening. Thank you for your service here. My name is Jim Hoy.
I live on Hill Street in South Portland, Maine.
And Scott, tonight when you summarized and we're
talking about all this money, could you list all the
litigation that the South Portland is involved with,
disgruntled employees, you know, major
lawsuits, because that never appears in our financial statement,
and it can be $20, $40 million. So,
and we have some real outstanding cases here in town.
We have, you know, the South Portland SWAT team over at Deering High
School
during lunch hour, and they took that poor kid down,
and, you know, I think there's a lawsuit coming
there. And, and then, Hamilton, right?
The, the police. He had nothing but a pair of pants
on. 50 police with their guns on him,
and they shot him. I sh- Then there's, of course, there's me, me and
Candy. They ended up at our house. They had guns against my
head. So there's these lawsuits out there, and they're
big. Next thing, city council, I'm
asking you this one.
Could you assist that the-
Actually, actually, I just wanna correct that.
Yeah.
Because when you make a public comment, it is addressed to the chair.
Okay. That's fine. Yep.
Thank you.
On, November 10th, I submitted a FOIA to the
city, and five months, nine days later,
no, no FOIA.
No FOIA. Now, I just listened to two
well-run departments. Those water resource people
are phenomenal. Phenomenal. Look what they've done,
and they're all set to get their state licenses.
And we have a judicial branch here
that
five months
for
a couple pieces of paper that should be right on file? I mean...
So I'm gonna ask you to ask, you know, the police after
this meeting, maybe a private conversation, but using, you know, a
parental love and, you know, kind words
to get into their offices, finish these FOIAs, and
get them out to the, get them out to the people who asked for them.
Next topic is they charged me $475 to do it, and I'm
like, "Sure. Here's $475 for my FOIA." That's
fine. But later,
my... I have relatives and I, I remember we're, we were talking, and we
were talking about when Candy and I got married, we were
22, and we had three kids before we were
30. And every-
30 seconds
... single penny was accounted for.
Every pe- And I realized, wow, if I was 25
years old, 26,
Ahearn could come over, put a gun against my head, and
I didn't have the $475. And I realized the
city is discriminating against people who don't
have money, who need their FOIA.
It's economic discrimination
against, you know-
Time.
And I'm just thankful I have the
$475. So that's all I wanted to say.
Your time is finished.
And I appreciate all that you do.
Your time... Sorry, your time's finished.
Yeah.
Thank you so much.
Come on down if you've got public comment. Let's keep it coming.
Thank you.
Um, city council members, city manager, and other South Portland
leaders, my name is Malcolm Meyer Debrecare.
I've been a South Portland resident for nearly five years with my wife,
Caroline. I've been planning to come to commend the city for its plans to
buy the now former Walgreens to use it for a police station, but that
changed last week when I opened the Portland Press Herald's
website. I was shocked, appalled, and outraged, but
mostly hurt. Hurt to see that the South Portland Police
Chief, somebody who is-
Comments are addressed to the chair. Thank you.
Was hurt to see the South Portland Police Chief, someone who has
maintained-- who is supposed to maintain and uphold the highest standards for our
city's law enforcement, betray our trust.
Let me be clear, the words from a Homeland Security investigation
agent about ICE enforcement activities were unsurprising based
on this administration. "They're going back to their s******e countries."
Wonder where he got that from. Not once, not
once during all the text messages back and forth with the HSI
agent and Portland Police leader did Chief Ahern say, "These
are our neighbors. These-- those are families.
Those are people going through a legal process guaranteed to them
by law." After the HSI agent said in a text,
"Appreciate the help. We certainly p****d o*f the libs in regards to
protests outside of area hotels", Chief Ahern responded,
"Appreciate working with you. Stay safe going forward."
Mind you, this was in response to Mainers standing up for their neighbors,
non-violently protesting, saying, "In America, we have
rights. We have a right to seek asylum, to have our day in
court, to speak out and say we are not the catch of the
day." What this text message underscored was not the Chief
looking out for an incredibly diverse, welcoming
community. It did not reinforce for community
members, especially people of color like myself, that at least
we could count on the police department to have our backs.
It underscored a deep distrust of law enforcement and what's said when
others, including community members, aren't watching.
Well, we are now, and this conduct is unbecoming of an officer, let
alone the chief. It's time for you, the city council, to
defend your community when the chief would not. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your comment. More? Come on, people.
If you've got comments, please come, come
forward.
Hello, Council. Uh, I am also referencing the Press Herald article
on March 12th, and it was-
Could you introduce yourself, please?
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. My name is Matt Wynn.
I live on, Alfred Street, and I'm here on behalf of my residents and
friends in addition to myself. Um, this is also
referencing that same article, regarding the liaison,
Agent Laroque, and Police Chief Daniel Ahern, as well as the
Portland PC, Mark Dubois. Despite
promises of nonco-cooperation,
they approved of the job of kidnapping our neighbors,
and even as Agent Laroque quoted, "You guys
are welcome support despite some of your residents."
Now, some of the residents are us. Uh, we are
the residents of South Portland, and they were kidnapping our friends and
neighbors.
There was zero pushback on the racist remarks that have already been mentioned by
another person. Uh, in fact, a lot of people
con-construed that as tacit approval.
Offers of assistance against the quote-unquote insane, peaceful
protesters justified as maintaining a positive
working relationship with the federal government and federal agencies.
Now,
what kind of relationship do we want with ICE and
ICE enforcement? Non-compliance was protecting our friends and
neighbors, welcoming neighbors from other countries and other areas of the world
to live and work in South Portland, something that's the lifeblood of our
community. That is very well non-compliance in
the first place. That is why ICE was here in the first place.
Cooperation with that is not in our best interest and it never has
been. Where was the South
Portland Police Department when we needed them?
When there was an armored gunman intimidating residen-residents all last
spring and summer, where were the three-sixty cameras that they offered to
ICE to surveil our own citizens to set up and protect
our citizens in that case? We see that there's a lot of double standards
there. Where was the South Portland Police Department when it
was discovered that the flock cameras that they had partnered with to
surveil us were discovered to be easily
accessible in a thirty-second hack by almost anybody with an internet
connection and publicly broadcast on the open
internet to surveil ourselves, our children, and anybody in
Cash Corner and anywhere else these cameras are?
Where have they been doing that? And my question to the council is, where is the
accountability for all this?
Chief Ahern's, the department has made a choice against
public safety-
Thirty seconds
... and I mean, to be frank, we can re--
expect some kind of retaliation because they have shown themselves to
be who that is.
I don't feel safe coming up here and speaking like this
because I don't feel safe with the public safety officers of this depolice--
police department led by the police chief, and I don't think anybody else
feels that way either. Thank you.
Thank you very much. More public comment, please come
up.
Hello, Chairman. My name is Carlton Parsons, and
I currently live at, 358 Clarks
Pond. Um, I'm here, as
people know me as the resident South Portland housing policy
nerd. Um, I would love to adv- be here
to advocate for a radical approach to housing,
possibly through, whatever means
necessary that we have. But unfortunately,
this is a budget meeting, so I'm gonna talk about
budget. Um,
this year, the budget for the
ICE immigration had reached
$170
billion, giving them a grand total of
$76 billion annually.
So ask yourselves, how much do we spend on kids for the
federal government? The federal government spends $12.3
billion on childcare, $7.6
billion for WIC and SNAP,
$115 billion
for Medicare spending to help 35 million kids.
Here, the federal government, you wanna know how much the federal
government is spending on every single illegal immigrant in this
country? We can give them
a tic- plane ticket to Miami, give them a
14-day cruise around the Caribbean
to Barcelona, Spain, and still
have $1,500 left over
annually. We spend
5.5K per undocumented
immigrant in this country. Every single
dollar that is not s- that is spent on illegal
immigration is taking money
outside of our kids, our families,
our infrastructure, our sewage system, our
housing. Every single person here should be
passionate about the financial stewardship of our
financial government. ICE has hurt
our officers, our local officers,
the reputation of our local officers, and the financial standing of
our local officers. The immigration enforcement now has
five times-
30 seconds
... more budget than our local
officers at the federal level. Every single time we
choose to promote ICE, we are taking money directly out of
our community, out of our service, out of our proud
police officers, out of our fire members every single
time. We as a community should passionate- be
passionate about financial stewardship at not just the local level, but at
the federal level. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
More public comment. I...
K- keep coming up, please, 'cause if I s- don't see you coming up, I'm gonna think
it's over. And I, and I think there's more to
come.
Coming up.
Counselors, Jeff Steinburn, Cottage Road.
Among the many things you'll be considering
even later tonight is whether to designate
$100,000 for rental assistance to
South Portland residents impacted by federal immigration
enforcement agents in January. You will do
that because many of our South Portland neighbors, and especially
our newer neighbors, had reason to be so intimidated by the
incursion into our community of those immigration agents
that they didn't dare venture out for fear of being harassed or
detained or arrested or worse.
So sometimes they couldn't pay rent, and for some of them, that
fear continues even now.
What we know now is that that surge of agents, ICE and
other, lasted just four days,
from the 20th of January to the 24th of this year,
and that the agents of that surge were gone by the next
morning, avoiding a
snowstorm, and somehow we're the
snowflakes. But here we
are, more than two months later, still dealing with
that incursion, and some of us still fearful because
of it. Chief O'Hearn has told us that he was informed that
the insurgents were gone on that Saturday, the
25th,
and we've learned from the Press Herald that
then, that day, he informed Mr.
Morelli, who was in- who then informed council.
So my first questions have to do with that transfer of
information. What did it-- When did it take place
exactly, and when and how did council act to inform
the public that the incursion was
over? What or what could we have
done better to reassure ourselves, and especially
our most vulnerable neighbors, that the worst might be
over? As for the part played by our
own South Portland police, about which the Press Herald
has also reported, what has council done to satisfy
itself that they operated in accordance with the
conditions this community established
for interactions between our own law enforcement officers
and federal immigration agents?
30 seconds.
Altogether, apart from those limitations, it surprises me that our own
South Portland police, whose integrity and professionalism
we citizens have had good reason to regard highly-Would have
anything at all to do with these interlopers who
incident after incident
have shown themselves to be undertrained,
careless, bullying, undisciplined, disrespectful
of the law, and unwilling even to identify who they
are.
Time.
They may have the outfits, none of the heart.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please, on public comment.
All right, I'm gonna close it. All right, thank you.
Counselors, Pedro Vasquez, speaking tonight
as in my capacity as the chair of the South Berlin Human Rights
Commission. We're on Colonial
Drive. I'm gonna speak briefly tonight
about these recent, reportings regarding communication
between our local law enforcement and federal immigration
agents. I'm not here to question intent, but I am
here to speak about impact.
Over the past few weeks, as we all know, members of our community have been
afraid. Not abstractly, not
hypothetically. They've been afraid to go to work, afraid to
leave their homes, afraid to be
seen. And I'm gonna say this personally,
my own family experienced that fear.
We had conversations about what we would do if one of us was
detained. We carried our documentation with
us, and we planned for situations that no family
should have to plan for.
And that experience is not unique.
It's shared and it matters
because in that kind of moment, even informal communication between
local institutions and federal enforcement carries
weight. It shapes how people understand
their relationship to our local government.
It raises a real simple question. Are local
systems here to protect us, or are they connected even
indirectly to actions that create
fear?
That question matters
because trust is not built in policy statements.
It's built on lived experience. I also think that
it's important to name something else directly.
Some of the tactics that are associated with these enforcement operations have
already been challenged, and in some cases restricted by
federal courts on constitutional grounds.
Many of our neighbors who were kidnapped are back here because of the
way that they were snatched, and that also matters
because it means that the concerns people are raising are not hypothetical.
They're grounded in real questions about rights, boundaries, and the
rule of law. And what makes it even more important than
that at this local level is that we're clear about how
we show up and what role we play. That
experience has consequences beyond fear
alone. We're seeing people withdraw-
Thirty seconds
... from work, from public spaces, from daily economic
activity. It's not a human concern.
It's a community concern. It's an economic concern.
It's a governance concern. While local government cannot control federal
enforcement, we can shape how those actions are experienced.
And so this is not about blame. It's about clarity.
Clarity about roles, boundaries, and about how we show up for people when
we feel that they are vulnerable. Because when people begin to withdraw
from work-
Time
... from school, and from civic life, that tells us something important about how
our systems are being experienced.
And right now, some members of our community are continuing to tell us that
what they are experiencing is fear.
Thank you.
Thank
you.
Good evening. I'm Chelsea Bien. I live on Margaret Street.
Um,
didn't have prepared comments, so I'm just gonna work, work my way through
this. Um, I just, first
wanna echo what Pedro just said about
families, how common it was for families to take steps to
protect themselves and, well beyond
the families who were the direct targets of ICE actions in
Maine. My husband is a naturalized citizen.
Um, and,
when I read the comments,
the text messages
from the chief, on Friday,
I, felt real
frustration and anger,
for our community
and for the broad network of volunteers, many of
whom are my friends who worked so hard to help their
neighbors, and especially for those people who have been most
affected. And I also felt an immense amount
of dread for my husband to see those
comments and, to
have, his
own anxiety and fear about what's happening
in our community and our country
heightened by them. Um,
I
had a conversation with others, with Chief Ahearn this morning, which I
really appreciated, and I had
many of my questions and deepest concerns answered in that
conversation. However, I feel deeply that we
need to hear from the city leaders,
urgently, more beyond the statements that have been
made in the press so far. Um,
and I know that
what Carlton said is true, that the-- this-
These, the, this interaction and the way it's been reported, and, and the
fact that it happened to begin with has, has hurt our police department
in addition to our community more broadly.
And I think that the process of, of restoring what
trust has been lost begins with really heartfelt
comments from our chief. Um,
and so I would ... I, I have specific questions I guess,
Scott. Um,
what steps did-
30 seconds.
I'm sorry. Oh.
What steps did the council take to ensure that the police department,
in light of the text messages that came to light, ha- took
... Kept its promise to not be coordinating with
ICE? Um, what steps did council take to review its own
process in, how information was received or
shared? Um, what steps will the city take to bui-
rebuild trust with the community?
And if I could ask that is it feasible for the chief to address that final
question himself. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good evening, everybody. Um, my name is Eleni Richardson.
I live, on Sylvan Road. And,
I did not have prepared comments tonight.
I actually came here to support Chief Ahearn in hopes that he
might address our community. Um, I had the pleasure of s- of
sitting with him today and,
y- you know,
we live in a world where news stories are reinforcing stereotypes,
where,
we are, we are waiting to be disappointed, based
on what we think,
leaders
should and shouldn't be doing. Um,
I am incredibly sympathetic, but we
need to hear directly, from the
person who, is unfortunately,
maybe made a
mistake. And,
you know, I have a lot of respect for,
the need to try to create some kind of relationship with, with
ICE when they were in our community in, in a way to keep
our, community safe. To, to, to have a
connection point to them in such a way,
to keep our
police officers safe. Um, you know, I, I,
I think, I think a lot of assumptions and judgments are being made,
but they're gonna continue and they're gonna get worse if we don't
hear, the other side and the context that I
think, that I think is there. And I,
and I do think what I witnessed today was, wa-
was, was deep regret. Um,
and I,
wanna encourage that person
to come up here and speak tonight. And I also wanna ...
And I also unfortunately,
we need to hear from you guys as well.
Um,
again, very, very sympathetic to, to, to the, to the
agenda that you all carry, the responsibility you
carry. Um, but we are living in a time
where,
leaders quite frankly have to speak up more for those
who can't. And, what I witnessed-
30 seconds
... during the ICE search was, a
community that would stop at nothing,
to support their neighbors in crisis and, and a community
that stepped in where infrastructure supports just quite frankly could not
and could not do so quickly. So here is your
opportunity, as well as the donation
that is, or the allocation of the $100,000 to the Project
Home for South Portland residents facing eviction.
Time.
Um, those gestures are, are,
are, are, are, are, are very
important. So please, please use your position of power to
explore-
Eleni. Eleni, you're done
... I know. To, to do, to do more than, than you might think you should.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
All right, I don't see any further public comment.
Public comment is closed. Thank you very much.
Um, Mr. City Manager, one of the, questions that we
heard, in various forms is whether we could hear from the chief
tonight.
Yes. Chief Ahearn is here, and, he's, he is
interested in, addressing some of the questions, and, comments that
came up. So welcome, Chief, to the podium.
Thank you, Mr. Manager, Council, Dan Ahearn, your
police chief.
I
am ... I've heard things like
disappointed. And disappointed is
a,
nothing I ever wanted for you to see in me or
experience in me and, and the community.
If I've disappointed you and the community, I'm truly
deeply sorry for
that.
I had a really good conversation this morning with Chelsea and
Eleni.
Uh,
it's a start. It's a, it's an opening of a dialogue and
communication for me to get better and to
learnThat
January, our community experienced something that
no one wants to experience. I
had... I, I... Cops
aren't, aren't fearful. I, I was,
anxious, nervous, worried
that our officers
were gonna be exposed to some of those things that we all saw on TV.
I wanted to do everything in my power to keep them from being
engaged in one of those incidents with some of our
community members. I, I, I didn't know what I could
do. What I didn't do
was communicate, collaborate, work
with, provide information to, go against
what your directive was of me to not work with
ICE. I did not do that.
I wanna make something very clear.
Your frustration, your anger, your
lack of trust belongs with me
and only me,
not our police department, not our police officers.
They are the best in the state. They are the best
trained. They had nothing to do with
this. Do not engage, involve them
and say the police department. It had nothing to do with them.
They are the, they are
the absolute best. We have the best team.
You have the best police department in Maine,
and they had nothing to do with this.
They didn't know that I even had this contact.
I thought I scored when I got this contact, 'cause they don't
engage with us. They don't share information with us. We had nothing.
None of us had nothing. The governor had nothing.
The state police had nothing, and oh, my God, I got a contact with somebody who was
actually gonna be in our city. And I thought, "Well,
a- at least I can engage. At least I have
something." I made some mistakes
there. Let's be clear about it. You saw my
texts. I reached out to this
person. He made some unprofessional, inappropriate
comments, and I didn't push back, and you're right.
I missed, I missed there. I can do better than
that.
We will continue
to work with our law enforcement partners, our federal partners, our state
partners, our local partners. That's going to include
HSI. HSI does a lot of things other than immigration
enforcement. I understand better today,
after our, this morning's conversation, how much impact
this effort had on, on our community members, our most
vulnerable.
I expect you to hold me to the highest standard.
I ex- I'm, I'm very proud
of, of what I do and how I do it,
and I want to exceed those expectations and, and what you expect of me every da-
and I didn't do that here. So
I need to learn from it and get better.
But it has to be directed at me and me only.
Again, our police department did not cooperate with
ICE here, and we don't. We didn't then, we didn't, we don't today, and we
won't tomorrow. We don't do it. Do we
foster a professional relationship with them?
Absolutely, we do. ICE,
HSI, federal law enforcement partners,
they ha- they have a lot of power, and when we engage
them in, in things like human trafficking and sex trafficking sting
operations, and we need them there, and we want them there, the US
attorney, the state attorney, the district attorney, state police,
all of our federal partners, we sit in a room, and we come up with a plan, and we
go after those people that
are exploiting young
girls and women
in our hotels right here in South Portland.
We have to have that relationship.
They bring a, a, a, a, an
incredible amount of authority and power to that
process. When we find that person, they're gone,
and they don't come back.
So I have to maintain that. Those text
messages,
I, I coulda done better. I, I acknowledge that, and I, I will get
better.
I, I wanna reiterate, I can't tell you how proud I
am
of our police officers who work day and night
to protect all of us.
They have nothing to do with this, and you can't cast
aspersions on them,
not for a second. I wish I could share with you the,
the emails I get, the accolades of
the, the, the interactions that our officers have with people
in our community. I have hundreds of them, and I share them
in, in class with people,
acknowledge them. They go in their file folders, but it's every
day. "Chief, I just wanna tell you that I had this
most professional person come, and they were so empathetic," and I, I get them all
the time.
They didn't... They had nothing to do with this. This was on me.
This was, this was on me.
I apologize to you, Mayor
Scott.
I coulda done better, and I'll, I'll get better.
Thank you.
All right, I think there are some more questions, Scott, that
maybe-
Yes
... be, are asked directly of you or of me.
So they're, going back to the original list, there was a, there was an
ask for a list of litigation against the city.
Uh, Brandon, I'm only aware of one, lawsuit right now that's been filed-
Mm-hmm
... against the city. Um, our notice of claim, I guess it probably
is more important. It's already getting some,
press. It was related to the,
related to the, the Deering incident. Is that correct?
Uh-
You aware of any others?
Yeah. Um, so I think there's an important distinction to be made
also, with the insurance coverage as
well, so-
Good
... um-
I was gonna cover that-
Yeah
... but, good.
Yeah, the only other, claim, that I'm aware of
is there was a, a claim filed, regarding
a FOIA request-
Got it
... that, was just recently filed that, that we're responding to.
Um, but beyond that, there are, no other claims that I'm
aware of.
Yeah. And, and it, it would be way too premature to,
to judge that. Um, you know, Mr. Hoy may feel that we're gonna lose certain
lawsuits, but that's, definitely not a certain outcome, and,
we have insurance coverage, so it's never gonna be the case where the city has to
spend millions or hundreds of thousands, out of its own pocket
to pay for a lawsuit if we were even found,
to be guilty. There's, there's, there's, there's limits in the law,
but also more importantly, we have insurance coverage and that's what, and,
and that's what, part of the reason we, we have that is so that we don't
experience large, losses, if they
occur. Um, there was a
question, about when the city council knew about the
text messages, and specifically about, that
ICE would be withdrawing and how did it act to inform the public.
I think that was a question for the council.
I'll just say on my end, I have zero regrets about not
publicizing anything on social media, that that's the information that we had
because God forbid we were wrong, and people felt safe and
started going out and, oh, it turns out we were lied to, or the
president changed their mind or
what hap- whatever, and then, it would
have been far worse. I know there were informal communications between
some councilors and some members of the community about this, but even after
that, we were getting called saying, "Hey, no, they're still here.
You said they were gone, and, and ICE is here." And so fortunately, they were,
they had gone, but fortunately, we, didn't,
announce anything to... in, in my view because it really wasn't ours to
announce because we didn't know the, the verifiability of, of
that information. Despite the, you know, the,
the, the, the texts, we weren't getting much information at all from ICE.
So I don't know if there's anything else, Mayor, you wanna add to, to that one?
Um, one thing, I do wanna clarify for members of the public
that I do not speak on behalf of this council.
There is no one council member who speaks on behalf of
council. So I will say personally, because I'm the one who's
usually first in touch, getting to sit in the mayor's seat
this year with the city manager, he did let
me and he let the whole council then know,
what the chief had learned through these text
messages.
I, I just wanna underscore what Scott said that for us to
then say, "Let's announce, South Portland now announces
that the
immigration enforcement surge is over throughout Maine,"
would have been deeply irresponsible and
pretty weird. I kn- do know that
some of my fellow councilors, and maybe they can nod their heads,
knew of neighbors and community
folks who were working with families
and doing groceries and helping to get cars moved
and before the snow and, you know, watching over children.
And so when we knew of those folks, we tried to
get word to them saying, "Hey, this is what we're hearing."
But never would I have considered that we had enough credible
information to make any kind of official
announcement.
Uh, there is another question about what has the city council done to satisfy that
the chief's text string was not violative of the council
proclamations on this matter. I don't know if it
was-
S-
... directed to the council, what has the council done to satisfy that the chief's
texts weren't, in contradiction, violative of pr-
prior proclamation, that you made in terms of cooperation
with, with ICE?
We don't have any evidence to the contrary.
We have our own chief saying that by the
definition of our directive, do not work cooperatively with
ICE on issues of immigration enforcement, that
the, he did not, and his officers did
not. We have no reason to doubt our chief on
that.
I guess you could somehow feel that
to engage in a fairly brief back and
forth texting to get some information that might be useful in South
Portland was cooperating, but I don't buy it.
I don't think that's cooperating.
I, I'd like to say something. Um-
Why?
Why? I was just went to s- We are a border
state, which means that we have a presence for Custom
Border and Patrol at all times. And
the recent ICE behavior, and actually with
CBP-Who some of the most violent actions have been
people who have been CBP officers, this
happened in Minnesota, it has not happened here, have been there
for 10 years. What has happened, however, as a
directive from the top, this means federal, and
some of that was not even... This is, we're not even gonna put it in writing-
Councilor, I'm gonna ask you to be brief only so that-
Okay, and that-
... the city manager can finish-
This is, the whole point-
... answering the questions
... on the federal level is fear and intimidation, and that's what they
are doing, so that we do not resist, so
that we, we feel that we are powerless.
And so that's what you have to... This is not
something that-
I, I-
... the police chief can control
... if you don't mind, Councilor-
Okay, I'll stop
... I'm gonna ask the city manager just to go back to keeping some of these
questions in order, and I don't mean any disrespect. Thank you.
There, there was a couple requests to hear from the chief specifically.
Um, there was a Jan Eric question, where is the accountability
to, directed at the council. I do- I don't know, if there's anything you wanna
share there, Mayor. Um, I,
I'll, I'll, I'll just add, I, you know, I think there's, this is a situation
where two things can be true at once.
I think there's legitimate, concern that,
I understand and appreciate that's in the community for,
first of all, ICE being here with the
surge, and, and, and how that
impacted folks, and still does.
Um,
it- and also, the fact that they, that, that
there was concern that there wasn't, you know, pushback, or there was a missed
opportunity because I think, I don't think anyone agrees with the
type of language that was used, by that
agent in that, in that text thread.
Um, I think it can also be true that just because the chief didn't explicitly
condemn that, it doesn't mean that he is endorsing it in, in any
means. And if I would've thought that the chief, you know, was the kind of
person that would be using those terms, he never has in any
communications that I've seen, then it might be a different story.
But that's just not it. I think it was, "Here's the handoff to Portland, they're
the ones you wanna talk to about helping you, with the protest at your
hotel." Uh, there was a long thread where the chief wasn't involved in
any discussion, and then at the end there was so- there was, there was some wrap up
when, when I understand why there was concern with the, the, the good job comment.
But I don't take that as a tacit endorsement of, of, of,
everything that ICE has ever done, including some of the horrific
things that, that we've seen. So I, I,
so I think too, like I said, those two things, you know, can be true, and I, I
do support the chief. I appreciate his comments about not having this reflect
on, the department. Um, he said a
lot tonight that I hadn't even heard him say, so I appreciate his honesty and his
candor, a- and, his willingness to, to, as he
said, to, to learn from this, and appreciate the comments from the folks here
tonight about, you know, meeting with him and, and sharing the concerns that it
sounds like w- were, were well, well received.
But,
I, I don't know. I, I was trying to tie this into something. I'm sorry.
I forgot-
All right
... what it was gonna be.
All right.
But there was another question in here.
Um,
but that was, I wanna hear from the chief. Did I get everybody's questions?
I wanna make sure.
I, I would say there's a considerable amount of questions asked.
Some of them I believe to be a little bit more in the way of a rhetorical device
than a specific and answerable question.
I did hear some questions about, cameras, and
I-
Yeah
... did hear the word flock, and I think what I would like to
say is I think there are, known concerns
about flock cameras, and I have
asked the city manager for information, and I've circulated it, and
people who have emailed me, and I do think that,
further discussion of that will come up within our budget discussions
because there is budget put forward for an additional flock
camera. Um, so I, I hope that people can
know that that's coming. Um, and then this
one other question was, you know, does this, do we
recognize, again, the danger of answering for the, these
folks is not one I want to get near, but, do I
recognize that leaders need to speak up for those who
can't? I do, and I think
I have, and I've heard other fellow council members
also do that. Um, and I am specifically at this point
referring to speaking up about,
the, the care and well-being of, the well-being of our neighbors,
our m- recent immigrant neighbors. We do speak up.
I also think sometimes it's wise to realize that you
probably shouldn't speak up for people who aren't you.
You shouldn't assume that you are the representative and you have the knowledge of
a community that is not yours. So there is some danger there, and you need to be
careful. What I believe is that leaders should do something, and
I do think this council has not shirked its
responsibilities. We've looked at the fear and the
economic harm to our immigrant neighbors, our recent
immigrant neighbors, and we've said, "What can we do?" And so
first we put out a lot of words, but words have power.
That was a resolution that we passed in February.
Then we thought, is there something of merit to a
moratorium or a eviction moratorium?
That was thoroughly discussed. We had landlords come here as well as
tenants. We talked about that. We decided that would not work well
for South Portland at this time. Then we moved to rental
assistance. As you've heard, we're going to talk about the amount of
rental as- assistance that we would put forward through a
nonprofit that is set up to make,
I guess what you could think of as... Well, they're not grants.
It would be set up to make payments directly to landlords.
So that... Leaders should do things, and I, I think that's what
we're trying to do
Show you.
One last thing I'll say just for clarity too.
The, the cameras that were referenced, I couldn't tell from, from when the speaker
had said it, but it made it sound like maybe the speaker thought that we were
offering to deploy cameras to monitor protesters.
That, that wasn't us, that was the Portland major.
We, we don't deploy, we didn't and we don't deploy cameras- ...
in that type of situation. I don't know whether Portland did or not, but,
that, that wasn't, that wasn't us.
I see Councilor Pride. Yes.
Thank you, Mayor, and I thank you for your comments.
Um, most of them or if not all were representative of how I feel, but I wanted
to offer another perspective. I think many of you know, or
people who don't know, I have helped run,
lead, worked for, worked in, and belong to a
church that is very supportive of new Mainers.
Um, you know, I am, I participated
in protests while ICE was doing their thing.
I,
I was dismayed not only at what ICE did, I, I was
dismayed when I saw the chief's comments.
I will say this, that we as a council, not to sort of deflect
anything, but just so people get a better idea of timeline, 'cause there were
questions about timeline. We heard from, the
city manager that the chief had a contact, but we didn't know the
contents of those texts. N- nothing was directly relayed to
us. But when it was relayed that ICE was done, I did
have quiet conversation with some of the leaders of those groups that I've been
part of and, and with my pastor, just to let him know,
look, you know, take this for what it's worth.
Take this with a grain of salt. Maybe don't pass it on to actual new Mainers,
but, but make sure the l- people that you're, that are working with them maybe have
some hope that this is over. Um, and, and
do with this information what you can.
So, and I, and I know a number of people here had those kind of communications.
So, the information was used, and I agree exactly with what,
what's been said about, you know, the downside of using it more
broadly. Um, I had a unique opportunity this
week. Um, I, well, not quite unique.
I had other councilors with me, but then I stayed after.
We went to, the National League of Cities conference, and at the conference
they had a session about immigration and municipal
responsibilities, and, and, things like
that. And one of the speakers was Chief Brian
O'Hara of the Minneapol- Minneapolis Police.
And afterwards I stayed quite long 'cause many people were in line to talk to him
and, and take their picture with him and I was one of the last people in the room.
And I stood with him and I discussed the chief's comments.
I wanted to know his take on that, because
he, you know, their, their city
suffered a
many big blows and it, it was really difficult and he talked during the session
of roving patrols, of
multiple jurisdictional agencies.
Mm.
They had Homeland Security, they had Border Patrol, they had DEA,
people with... And, and it was a headless organization.
No one knew who was in charge. And one thing that bothered him the
most, he talked about during the session, was not having information.
He was just... It was a complete blackout.
In fact, when he tried to communicate directly with the ICE
authorities, they threatened to arrest him
for incitement
because he was going to send his police out to, you know, help
maintain crowd control and try and maintain safety in the city.
No, that would be inciting a riot apparently according to ICE agents.
Mm-hmm.
And so the rest of the time ICE was in town, his lawyers were the ones
talking to them
and trying to convince them not to arrest him, 'cause what kind of look would that
have been? But
it was a harrowing experience. Um, he understood
completely sort of what the chief was trying to
do. Um,
that all being said, I, I agree and I'm,
I'm... For what it's worth, I accept the chief's apology.
Yeah.
Uh, I have known him to be nothing but a man of
integrity. I, I have no reason to doubt
what he's told us. Um, I know that he's proud of his force.
And one other thing is, you know, as the mayor just said,
we, we show by our actions, not what we say,
right? And or both, hopefully. But I know that
the chief takes care of his officers and it's a multi...
There's more than one reason. O- one is obviously because he wants
people, he wants to retain his officers, have a good force, have people be healthy.
He cares about the people he works for.
But another reason is police officers go through s- so much trauma, and if
they ignore self-care, and if they ignore, if they don't take care of
themselves and aren't taken care of-
Mm
... then that leads to situations like what happened with George Floyd.
They go, you know, so much trauma can really do horrible things,
and we have good policy in our police o- in our, in our police force to avoid
those type of actions, those type of holds, all that stuff, but more
importantly we take de-escalation seriously.
And those type of things, you know, he doesn't say, "I want you to trust the
force," he does the training so that we have every reason to trust-
The police
... our police officers. So that's just what I wanted to offer. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other councilors? Councilor West.
Can we move item I-4 to this part of the agenda?
It's the $100,000. I think it would be appropriate to move
that to this-
Oh
... I consider-
I'm sorry. I looked at the wrong one.
If that's a motion-
I-
... to rearrange the agenda, I will, second it.
Well, I'm just-
Okay.
I, this would be very-
Or the mayor can do it
... drawn out. Yeah
... that's right.
All right. Yes. The mayor needs to put on her glasses, however, to actually
see where it is. Um, so where it
is right now, da, da, da, as number four, you'd like to move four to one.
Done. If the mayor has such a wild amount of power, she has done
that. Okay, thank you. Um, and-
No, it's, it's actually moving it way up to right now.
Yes.
We have to have it, yeah.
Ahead of the Mahoney discussion.
Oh. All right, thank you.
That's wise.
To me.
Which I'm sure is what the mayor intended to do just then, right?
Yes, that mayor. Somebody should speak to her. All right.
Um, so you would like to have the vote right now?
Of course you are.
You would like to have the vote on that right now?
Bring, have that read-
Well, on the item
... and have the vote-
The consideration of the item.
You bring the item up.
Okay. Um, I just was, I just was wondering if there
was anyone else who felt that they wanted to make comment.
And Councilor Coleman, I, you, I appreciated hearing from you earlier.
I just wanted just to get through the questions.
So do we have a motion on
that?
We have to have it read.
Yes.
Oh, wait. A mo- I think you can just do it, move the-
There's no objection
... move the item on. That was the ... If there's no objection.
There's no objection. I think.
To move I4 up to the current.
The only thing is I thought there might be discussion of the amount,
so-
Right
... I am moving it-
So she would read the item, and then-
Okay
... we'd have public comment.
And will you please read the order? Thank you.
You're welcome.
So order number 1672526, appropriating
$100,000 from undesignated fund balance to Project
HOME for rental assistance to South Portland residents impacted by federal
immigration enforcement activity.
Passage requires a majority vote.
So councilors-
Okay
... we, we had the workshop on this, last week,
and, our, and, council's guidance where you all wound
up, the average was right around $100,000.
You felt allocating from undesignated fund balance to Project HOME for this rental
assistance, donation was, was the appropriate
amount. Um, so the, attached order has been crafted.
Uh, as such, it would be, it is still,
established as a reimbursement. So once we're provided
information, from Project HOME that they've,
assisted, a certain number of, South Portland
residents, a- and paid that, that, amount to the
landlords, we would provide the reimbursement.
Project HOME estimates this will assist approximately 50 South
Portland households.
Thank you very much. Does anyone have any
questions?
No. Um, does anyone want to make public comment
on this item?
Councilor Pedro Vazquez. I'm speaking in my capacity as a private citizen.
We're on Colonial Avenue. Yeah. Um, I
think this is a great thing that you've crafted.
Uh, being familiar with some of the players, Project HOME, and how
quickly they get these funds into the necessary
hands and to prevent evictions and to prevent additional
trauma in our community is, is really the way to go.
So I'm really in support of this, and thank you for, for
taking this action. Thanks.
Thank you.
Chelsea Bian, Margaret Street. I also just wanted to say thank you for,
taking this up and carrying it forward.
And,
I guess I know that,
things happen sometimes slower than you want them to,
and I appreciate that there has been sort of multiple iterations of this
conversation now, and that hopefully this is moving forward and can help
potentially 50 households. That's amazing.
Um, and it's also a good reminder for the broader conversation tonight, I think too
of, like, things can feel hard and,
heated in moments, and that we grow and do good
together by moving through all of that.
Not to get too sentimental, but I think it's true.
So, thank you for doing this. I'm, I'm, I'm
grateful.
Thank you. Any other public comment on this
item? Seeing none, public
comment on the item is closed. What is the wish of the
council? Councilor Pride.
Move for passage.
Do we have a second?
Second.
Councilor Coleman. Councilor Pride?
Yes. Thank you, Mayor. Um, and thank you for the public comment.
I'm, I'm happy. Th- this is what I was really hoping would happen
and that we get to see in front of us, when I said no to the moratorium because
I believe that this is targeted. Um, and for people who
seem, you know, that this is not a good thing for whatever reason, because it's a
waste of money, this is money that's gonna go to landlords.
I mean, ultimately, this is bo- this is a both sides of the
equation help. We keep people in housing that need housing,
and we keep landlords able to own the housing that the person lives
in. So, I'm really glad this is happening,
and these are direct payments to landlords, and that it's, you know...
I trust Project HOME will choose the people who were affected,
and I'm, I'm, I'm glad the way we're doing this.
Thank you, Councilor Pride. Councilor Coleman?
That's- it's the most effective way in the- to, to, to,
to, to, ah, take care of our people.
Thank you very much. Anyone have any comment?
Any further discussion? Councilor Wet-
I-
Council-
No.
La, la, la, la, la, la.
Let Councilor Scott go first.
Councilor Scott.
Um, I appreciate that it is now March 19th,
and I wonder if it's possible to ask for sort of a
report in, say, a month's time as to the funds that have been
expended, and make sure that we don't lose the thread on
the opportunity
that- to either have the data
of what we have used in this fund, or if there is a
greater need that arises and that we don't
wait too long
Given that it's March 19th. So that's my request, I guess, to the council
and city staff towards the management of these funds. But I am in favor.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Councilor West.
I just wanted to say a few words about why I'm going to support this tonight.
E- I, when we last discussed it, I was
comfortable with a much smaller amount
in light of the facts that I recited at that time.
But I am voting for this tonight because I do f-
believe that it is one of the ways that we can try to reestablish and
rebuild trust in our community. I want to express my
support for the police chief. I have observed him carefully
during his tenure here in South Portland, and I respect
the job that he does as our chief. I think we all make
mistakes. I, later on tonight, if we have enough energy and
time and get to it, I'm gonna talk about one that I made a couple weeks ago,
with regard to Mahoney. But
we can't judge each other on a permanent basis because of,
words that could've been spoken in haste and error.
Uh, it's just, we need to work with a higher spirit of
cooperation and trust in our community.
And by supporting this payment, I
hope that it can be an indication that we do
care about all of us. We are a community, and I
have, I just admire all of you and all the members of our community
who have done so much to help those who were at fear
during the time that ICE was in the community.
And I, and I would like to say, even my own grandchildren, who have nothing to
fear given their cultural background, came home
from school scared. That's the, how much it permeated our
community. And so we all have to, let's all
work together. And I, I admire s- tremendously that our
chief had the strength to stand here tonight and
take responsibility. And
thank you all for just listening and being here, and
let's move on with a, a spirit of cooperation and do everything
we can to keep building our community.
Thank you, Councilor West. Councilor Matthews.
I'll be the, lone duck tonight to give the, opposite.
I, I will not be supporting this. Uh,
72 people in the school department got their pink slips
yesterday. 72.
Your school department has an $8.4 million
deficit. We, I in good
conscience cannot support using money from the general
fund when they're talking about closing
schools, and 72 is just the first
wave of people.
Mm-hmm.
72. That's a massive amount of the 600 employees of
the, of the school department. And to be
using money from the general fund,
taxpayer dollars, when we just heard that the sewer rate's
going to be going up, possibly doubling what people are
paying now.
Our tax rate is gonna go way up between the
city and the school department
needs. We're looking at possibly
a, a pretty hefty increase for each
individual home. So
I just cannot support giving money
from the general fund and taxpayers without their
approval, and it is their money. It's your
money. Maybe some of you agree with me, probably most
don't. But it's okay, because I just think that we're giving
away our tax people's money without their
permission.
Well, I'm glad you found me amusing again this morning.
I, I, no, no. What I've, what I, the reason I have a smile on my face
is I'm contemplating the hour and all the things
that I might say in answer to that, and whether I should.
But before I come to a conclusion on that one, I'm gonna see if any other
councilors have something to say. Councilor Walker.
Just very briefly, I am proud to be a part of a community
that supports our most vulnerable residents, and I recognize what my
fellow councilor just said, that that vulnerability can take all different
shapes and sizes. Um, but I appreciate that we have worked collaboratively
as a council and with members of our community to craft a solution for this
particular problem. So, thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
All I, I was smiling because one thing that I was thinking about was that
I actually respect that you, even when you're saying,
"Hey, I'm gonna be the lone duck," you come forward and you tell us what you're
thinking. So, I think what I would
add to those remarks is that the people who are harmed
also contribute to our communities.
Now, if you're, if we're saying, "Oh, but the, what we're talking about
specifically now is people who rent.
They're not paying property taxes," I would argue that some of them
are business owners.
Yeah.
And so in there, they're paying taxes, and that property taxes
are not the only way to contribute a c- to a community.
And I will leave it there. Thank you.
Um,
we have the motion. All in
favor?
All right, that is six to, oh, well all against.
One. Thank you. That is six to one. The motion
carries. Thank you very much. Um,
public comment is finished. Questions were answered to the extent we're able.
And thank you everyone who came here tonight, to discuss this.
All right, we are moving to public hearings and
action. Madam Clerk, could you please read order
16... Is it 165?Yes. Thank you.
Order 1652526, granting Lulu's Pizza at 740
Broadway, Unit 100, a coin-operated machine gaming license.
Passage requires majority vote. This is an existing business.
They're just simply looking to expand by having one game machine on the premises.
Notices have been sent out to neighbors.
We have received no public comment or concern.
All right. Any questions, counselors?
Anyone here to comment on this issue?
On this, on this order?
Charlie Keaney, Pleasantdale.
Thank you.
I, I just-- I don't know how... Is this gambling?
Is that what we're talking about? Is this a machine to bet on
basketball games or?
I can answer that for you right now, if that's the only question.
It's a video game, like an arcade game, to have in their
establishment. It's just because it's a coin-operated machine, we do
have to license it.
I see. Thank you very much.
You're very welcome.
Thank you. Any other comments? All right.
Comments closed on that one. What is the wish of the council?
Counselor Walker.
Move for passage.
Do we have a second?
Second.
Counselor... What was your name? Counselor Matthews.
Troublemaker.
Man. Um, all right, Counselor Walker.
No comment.
No comments. Counselor Matthews.
Nope, all go.
All right. Any other counselors have comments?
All in favor? That is a unanimous
vote. Thank you very much. Madam Clerk, will you please read order one
sixty-six.
Order one sixty-six, twenty five twenty six, granting Makoto LLC, doing business as
Makoto Sushi Bar and Grill at four four eight Cottage Road, a food
establishment with liquor license. Passage requires majority vote.
This is a new establishment for us.
It is at the former Elsmere Barbecue location.
All paperwork has been processed and the application has been routed for public
comment. We have not received any concerns at this time.
Thank you. Any questions, counselors?
Nope, don't see any questions. Any public comment on this
item? Comment on this item?
I don't see any comment. Comment's closed on that one.
Move for passage.
Thank you, Counselor Matthews. Seconded.
Looks like
everybody.
We'll do it half times.
Okay. Seconded, Counselor Scott?
Yes, please. Thank you.
Thank you. Counselor Matthews.
First of all, I'd like to apologize that you have waited so
long tonight and that we bypassed you.
And, next time, please bring food.
We could be here a long time.
So, anyway, thank you, and good luck to you.
And, it's, uh-- You've done a lot of work up there.
I've been by every day. Good luck.
Thank you.
Thank you. Counselor Scott.
I'm so excited. Thank you so much for investing in our
community, and I can't wait.
Yay. Any other counselors on this item?
Ditto.
All in favor?
And that is a unanimous vote. Yay. Thank you so much.
We've now reached the part of our meeting tonight that is our workshop
discussion about the project known as
Mahoney, and city fa-facilities.
And Scott, I think you wanna bring us up to speed on this
one.
Yeah. So, council, you know, you recall that you've given us
direction, for the Mahoney project, scale back the
option A one, some elements of option B one, which,
such as geothermal, to reduce energy use and, and the number of
elevators, having kind of a vacant third
floor, not including the library, et cetera.
So, the design team has been working on that.
Uh, they've come up with some numbers as to what the cost estimate would
be for, that project, even with the reduced
scope. Uh, so they're, they're gonna talk a little bit about that tonight and also
present various options for how the building space could be utilized, whether
it's a vacant third floor or some other, or some other,
scenario. There are a few questions tonight we're looking, and
there can be others if council has other guidance, but at a minimum, we'd like to
have clari-clarity on three, different questions, which I will put
up, on the screen at the end. Uh, a-and the first is
clearly, does the council wish to proceed with the scaled-down project as
proposed, or does the council wish to look at other
locations for City Hall like we did with, the police
department? There's a second question and a bit of a new twist.
Is there any interest on the council, for the city to engage with a
developer to explore the possibility of some sort of
public-private partnership at Mahoney?
Is there a way that they can build it and it's cheaper overall?
Um, is, is that a conversation council's interested in
engaging with? Um, both of those things, if we're looking for a different
location or looking to partner with a developer, probably would negate a
November bond ask, on this, but, we could talk
about that more. And then finally, initially the council had
indicated library would not be a part of,
this, project. Uh, and so the
question is, how, how do you wish to address facility needs?
There was some sentiment at the last meeting that maybe,
counselors were open to either reconsidering that decision or,
looking at another location or doing renovations on site.
It would just be helpful to have some guidance as to, what your
intentions are there with the library.
So, gonna welcome up, Craig, I think, you're going first
to provide you with an overview about, what
we found for cost options, et
cetera.
Screen.
Great. Well, thank you again. It's Craig Piper from
SMRT. Um,
it's a big meeting tonight, and we are also, have,
done some homework based on what you asked for.
I know there's also lots of things have occurred in the meantime,
so we have to remind where we came
from. Um, we were asked back in, in
February, to look at a mu- bunch of different
ways to evaluate the original concept
design, which was to bring the library
city services, utilize the auditorium and
theater within the Mahoney project.
And we studied, these options in February,
and the group asked us to focus on,
what, what was-- At the end of the meeting, it got a
little confusing of what was being asked specifically, but
it was basically
the library is not part of the project, but there's elements
of infrastructure that wanted to be brought in and to
keep the, geothermal system
and a few other elements a part of the project.
So we kind of honed in on keeping
the theater and the gym area as part of the
project, so that's part of the renovation as well as
where does the cost fall between
those.
What-- Again, we didn't do the full cost estimate.
We used all the parts and pieces. It's about a fifty-two million
dollar to fifty-six million dollar construction cost.
As we know, construction cost is one part of a total
project cost, so there's a factor added to that.
So it's seventy to seventy-five million dollars in
this what we call A1 to B1 to
incorporate all the elements that you asked for.
The biggest part of that ask is that there's
a significant part of the building that's empty.
It's ready and
renovated, infrastructure for
something to come in, but we don't quite know what that space would be used
for. So
when we think of where that,
when you asked us to evaluate the A1 to B1, there was different
ways of where that extra space could go.
And a part of our effort, if you're asking us
to develop the project, we wanna be smart about how
that vacant space lives and w-what's its
purpose. So we wanna think about how
that's renovated, whether it's in the future after the
project is evaluated, understand what type of
occupancy goes in there. The building is a combination of
business occupancy being city services as well as assembly
functions being the theater. So something in the business
occupancy is a more compatible future
use. But if there's a different element that the
council in-- would like us to explore, that takes some planning and
thinking of how we would separate that vacant floor from the other
occupied spaces.
What you didn't ask for, but we read in between the
ask of where-- how you would evaluate if we step back,
and you asked us to only fill this building with city
services, the auditorium and, and maintaining the
current, gym or future community
space, would be where is the best place for that
vacant space. So if we are looking to lease out
part of the building for, some community need,
maybe that is a lower level function where public are
coming just to that element. So that's the sort of the middle
option. The, option on the left is where
that vacant space is on the top floor, and those are just
various options of where the elements could
go in the building. The building on...
Or the option on the right is you're saying, "We're gonna spread
the
city services," the blue bar in the center, "across three
floors versus two floors, and sort of separate the building
vertically for that future vacant space." There's
pluses and minuses with all of those, but again, our
analysis is square footage base. So the cost
estimate is there's nuance here that there could be less
cost in one versus the other, but generically, we're just looking at
how much of the building we're renovating.
Um, I think we've touched on a lot of the
elements of the renovation, so I'm, I'm gonna skip
this slightly and just focus on
how
the square footage affects the evaluation.
So this is just going through those, three
scenarios. Public spaces, would be
on the lower floor and the middle floor.
Um, understanding how we connect the gym and the theater is
always an element in all the studies we evaluate.
Um, the future planning, so if we--
if this is the project that the council directs us
to, we are occupying the lower floors and the
gym and the, theater. The upper floor,
if it's a renovation later, it could be disruptive to
day-to-day operations and then understanding
theInfrastructure needs of what that vacant space is could
have a ripple effect of newly renovated space that we have to
plan for because if it's on the top floor.
Conversely, if we go to the... leave the vacant space on the lower
level, we renovate the top floors, it's
still integrating construction in an occupied building
down the road. So there's ways to go around that and provide safety, but
it, it's, it's a different way to think of master planning the
building. And then as I
s- mentioned, sort of, severing the, one of the wings off
vertically, is an option,
to evaluate. This spreads city services
across three floors, so there's some inefficiency there in
understanding how that would operate.
Um, but we are connecting the theater and the gym.
All the renovation is sort of focused in one
area. There's a lot more there, but I, I think just to
give... You, you understand the, the variables here.
Again, one of the asks that we, we
understand we're looking at the
renovating Mahoney, but there was
always been an ask of, is it, what does it cost to build just City
Hall somewhere else? And so we have a, a brief study
on evaluating that ask, which has
a lot of assumptions built in. But just city services
is about thirty-eight thousand square feet based on the proposed
program. So if we, looked
at a comparable Class A office building,
which is a, a, a term that, identifies the
level of expectations of a building, a very public
building is, is a, something
that would be... For the city would be a long-term,
building in our, our, our, as an asset, so we would want
to build it right from day, day one.
There's a range in just construction cost if we...
'Cause we don't know where the building would go.
There's a cost per square foot range that we have
here, and if we compare this, the one on the right is
when we came to you about the full build-out with the library, the
full building. Um, there's a, there's a
significant more dollars per square foot
renovation cost for Mahoney comparing to moving just City Hall
somewhere else. If
we extract that square footage
of the, the vacant space out of the project, the cost of the
renovation goes up. So it's even the delta
between a new building somewhere else and, and renovating Mahoney,
day one is a higher cost per square foot.
So comparing
the, the A- A1, B1,
that fifty-two million dollar construction compared to a new
site, it's about forty percent less
cost, but it's also less space 'cause there's no
auditorium or, or the, or community,
space. So
with all that, I guess I'm g- I'm gonna pause because I
think we've... The discussion or public comments
really is the, we're kind of at this point
since we're, we've been asked to focus our energies on public safety.
The urgency or the, the decision on urgency for Mahoney is
really kind of what are, what are our next steps.
And there are... We're at the,
separating if the council chooses to separate from going to a
referendum
in November, anything regarding city services at
Mahoney. We have time to evaluate things a little
cleaner and not be as reactive the way
we, we... I, I feel like in February, we're very much
like, "Let's just pick it apart." So I, I, I
hope that we take the time to think through,
sort of the next steps rather than give clear direction that
we're doing this B1 or A1, B1 because I
think we need, we all need a little more time on, on the
direction before we go forward. But this, this
addresses what you asked us to come back with, and then Scott
has these questions. So I can leave that up.
Did the job for me. Thank you. Yes.
Okay.
Okay, councilors. Um,
que- we'll ask some questions of Craig if you have them, then we'll have public
comment, then we'll have a discussion.
Councilor Walker.
I had a quick question about the slide, with the square footage.
Can you go back to that?
Uh.
Keep... And, and it's back two more. It's... I want the... So it's, yeah.
Yes. Yes.
Down one more. Um.
One more?
Yep. Hmm. No, I'm sorry.
Other way.
Go, go forward one more. Towards... Or go...
Or to, to, to the end of the presentation one more. There you go. Okay.
I just wanted to ask about the original concept design that included the library.
The cro- the cost per square foot was seven hundred and seventy dollars
per square foot. And now can you go down to the next slide?
And then, okay, in A1, the cost per square foot is eight hundred and twenty-three
dollars for the, the A1 plus plus. Um, why
the, why the difference? If we're getting considerably less
service, is it because the building is, is more empty?
Correct. Yeah. We're, we're still,
um... There's a lot,
I guess, the infrastructure improvements, we've talked about the
envelope, the structure would have to occur whether there's a
tenant in there or not. So we're taking a lot of costs
that you're not spreading it a- across other square
footage. It's building you up for the future for something to come
in, in the future fit out would be less expensive.But
sort of when you evaluate square footage, we're evaluating the
square footage you're gonna use. And so that's why that number goes
up. We're using less square footage, but we're spending more
mon- or less money, but less usables,
footage.
So the, the much scaled down project would essentially cost
quite a bit more money per square foot with less services for the
city with the hope that we get something in there in the future?
Correct.
Thank you.
Councilor Scott?
I had one quick question. This, the comparable
project's typical new Class A office building
has 450 to 550, doesn't include land acquisition, excludes
site development costs. And then I think on the next slide that I
have, which may be your next slide, there's a new site
for a new city hall building
from 550 to 650. And I just wonder if you can
clarify
those two different cost
estimates.
Yeah.
It's saying excludes site acquisition costs, but
I guess... Or sorry.
Acquisition.
Oh, one says excludes site acquisition costs and one said
excludes site development costs-
Right
... doesn't include land acquisition. So is that, is...
I guess maybe that's the question, is that the delta?
Yeah. It's, it, again, we're, we're trying to, provide
some framework to compare, but the numbers
that we have for Mahoney, we have the cost, the developed, the
cost for it. So we want it to be accurate of what it costs for
Mahoney. But we're comparing the building renovation, the
building, a new building for an office building.
We don't have that assumed site cost because we
don't know what it'll cost. What, is it a hilly site?
Is it a sloped site? Um.
Okay.
So, but we could, if, if the council needs more
breakdown specifically to compare apples to apples,
it's, I mean, it's obviously-
No, I was trying to... No, I appreciate that.
I was trying to understand the, that there are two somewhat
very different per square footage costs for like a new city hall
versus a new Class A
building.
Right.
But that's fine. Thank you.
Councilors, questions?
I don't see questions from councilors.
I'm gonna go to public comment then. Thank you.
Any public comment on this topic?
And we see a resident approaching.
Hello. Well, this is closely related
to housing, so.
Do you mind reintroducing yourself?
Yes, absolutely.
Thank you.
Uh, my name is Carlton Parsons, Clarks Pond Parkway.
Um, I guess a couple of questions that I had, kind of
based on the square footage. Um, I noticed
that it is definitely a lower cost to build a
newer building. Um, I wanted to ask the question of,
does that include, like, if we did a modern
infrastructure for that building, does that include modern-day
amenities that we wouldn't be able to have in the regular
Mahoney building? And then I guess a second question is,
if we are going to reuse that space
specifically for Mahoney, does
that also include have we already decided on what we're going to do with the
field as well? Um, because there is an
opportunity for if we wanted to turn Mahoney
into, you know, shared business. Housing can be
also an opportunity. Um, big fan of revenue
drivers and revenue increases rather than, you know, cutting
costs here and there. Um, so I think this is gonna
be, like, either way, I think maybe a more
innovative solution there might be something to explore.
So that's just my kind of question/comment.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else on the overall topic
of Mahoney
project?
Hello. Mark Chelemie. I live in Pleasantdale.
It's good to see you all, and I'm glad to have this opportunity
to support, this project. I think it's
fantastic. I think that the building is definitely
a asset to our city, over 100 years old,
and, I think there's so much possibility.
I was reading the original,
I guess, Order
135 about how you want to... It's
a unique opportunity to include the community to
help, you know, make this happen.
I can't remember the exact language.
I'm just curious how that works, you know, to
involve the community. Um, just hoping that they come
to city council meetings or,
um... I just like the idea to involve
everybody because if a community center is gonna,
be put into this, then I really think that, that
everybody, even in the other districts over by the airport
and the mall, should definitely know about
this. So I guess I'll go over there and tell them all.
No. Um, I just think the, the performing
arts, and, having the library
there is a good idea. Um, I hope that the police department
finds a new home over there. But I just wanted to support the idea of
having a community center. I really believe in-
The community, and I think there's a lot of possibility there.
Also, I think it's important maybe to exhaust the
possibilities of funding,
through alternative institutions that could help find
ways to, support the funding for this
project. And, thank you
SMRT for, for doing all that work and sharing.
It was very helpful. Um, so I just wanna say this is a great thing.
I hope, to see it succeed. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone
else?
Jeff Steinburn, Cottage Road. Counselors, I will not repeat, what I said in,
in an email to you earlier today. Uh, but I
do... I, I have been in several situations where
groups large and small have felt and been rushed into a
situation where they had to make a decision in a hurry.
It seems a little ironic that you would be rushed into a situation where you'd have
to make a decision in a hurry, given all the time that so many
people have already plowed into this.
But this feels to me exactly like one of those times.
I can't believe that you're ready to make the kind of decision that would
let Mahoney go togeth- go ahead in some particular
direction tonight. And failing that, it seems to me the
healthiest thing to do is to give yourself and give the community
time. As our first speaker said, "Take the time to think
things through," and we all need more
time. Uh, do what you need to do. Delay that
referendum. Give us the opportunity to do this
right. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Come
on.
Patrick Cost, Willard Haven Road.
Um, I would like to encourage a, a continued
focus on making Mahoney the civic center,
that the city needs and wants. Um, I
concur with the previous speaker.
More time's needed, and
I think less time is spent continuing to
iterate and iterate and seek
option after option. There's five years, over seven
hundred thousand dollars in fees have been spent.
It's time to just commit to Mahoney and make it
happen. And if that means you need to postpone the November
referendum to get it right, then you should do that, but make
Mahoney happen. Thank you.
All right, anyone else on the topic known as Mahoney?
All right, I don't see anyone else from the public.
That comment is closed.
Um, I think our council needs to have a
discussion based on the questions that have been
provided.
Mayor, there w- there was a couple questions from the first-
Oh, sorry. I keep... I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes, so first-
Let's answer questions first.
First question was, were there... What...
Will there be more modern amenities available in a new construction
city hall versus if it was in a rehabilitated
Mahoney?
Right. A- and it's a very astute question because
I, I, I would... I,
the amenities within the Mahoney building with the large
windows and the, features that we do
have, as an existing building would also
bring tremendous amenities. But also in all the cost estimates,
the infrastructure question, the energy components
were... The goal is to be as equal in a
new city hall as renovating Mahoney.
So the idea is that we're bringing Mahoney up to being that class
A building for infrastructure and reducing our energy
use. So just wanted to clarify that the...
Comparing a new building, what, what we've been
proposing to date is bringing Mahoney up
to today's energy code and exceeding the energy code because the
city's requirement of, of meeting and exceeding
the energy code. So, hopefully that
helps clarify that question.
Thank you.
Question about, if you... If...
What are we gonna do with the field at Mahoney originally.
I think as, folks know, the plan was to have the, a new police station
built on that site. That's no longer the case.
The council has opted to move forward with a, a different location,
pending a few other, boxes to check of course.
But, as of right now, there are no plans for that field other than to keep
it as open space. Um, but that's TBD.
There could be, you know, depending on, whether it is a comm- a
city center or whether the council decides to do something else with it.
There, there are other options, other than just keeping it as open space.
But as of right now, that's, that's what it would be.
Uh, there was a question about, how does, how does the project
involve the community. I, I, I think, you know, counselors if you wanna answer
that, my stab at it is the council formed the Mahoney City Center Committee, which
is compr- comprised mainly of residents, representatives from the
arts, and,
and sports, as well as the neighborhood ar- surrounding
Mahoney and different, city districts.
And so, that's been primarily, um...
They've been making a lot of the decisions and recommend- recommendations around
the project, and have done a lot of community outreach, you
know, as well to get the, sentiment of the community.
But I'd say that's probably one of the primary ways that, community, has
been involved.
Okay. D- Any, any other questions that you took in?
Uh, no other questions.
Okay, thank you
So now it is time for our council discussion.
Is there any councilor who's ready to jump right in?
Councilor West, jump. Thank you.
Yeah, and I know my colleagues are really tired, and,
and this is-- I'm feeling like tonight's discussion is gonna be like the school
board working on their budget because the first
question, I have to start off by telling you that after the
last meeting, I went back to our, our vision for
Mahoney, and I, I just want to talk about it
and remind the council
the, the library really needs to be part of Mahoney to carry
out our vision for Mahoney. And what we had said at the very
beginning was, we wanna trans-- And I wanna
stick with Mahoney. The one thing I wanna make absolutely clear tonight is...
So I think we've been... That first question kind of is
two totally separate questions.
Yes. Oops, sorry.
Don't worry. The-- I wanna talk,
so I'd like to just talk and not just focus on those
questions. Let's remember that what we said is we wanna transform
Mahomy- Mahoney and its site into an asset that serves our entire
community for the next hundred years.
Mahoney will become our town center, providing
opportunities for all, a source of pride for South Portland and
beyond, a gathering place for performances, lectures, and large
meetings, a community art space, continue to provide a space
for indoor th- youth athlet- athletics, and a space that can also
be used for community events, serve as our main library, providing
access to books and other media while providing spaces for groups to share
their skills and experiences and learn from others.
Those are the factors that really are the key elements of
Mahoney. I think we've lo- lost track of that when we start
thinking about looking elsewhere.
So I'm sitting here tonight saying, "I made a mistake." Remember, I told you I was
gonna tell you that. Um,
I, I think we lost track of that when we start looking at how
are we gonna use this site and this site and this floor.
I reacted really strongly to the idea of the
tremendous expense of building an addition.
And I s- But I think the problem is we've kind of gotta have
a reset. We just... So the first thing I'd say to us is, let's just
agree that we can't be ready for '20 for the, for a bond
measure in November. I hope that we can decide that.
Let's decide that we're gonna stick with Mahoney.
And my honestly
blunt view of this is, if we can't fit our city office...
But this is just my view because it's an example of how we're
all... If we can't fit all of our city offices in
Mahoney, let's use our library building for some city
offices, for the ones that aren't public-facing. It's much closer.
It's a nice building. It's got good natural light.
Um, but that's just another thing to throw out there.
The, the point is, let's not lose
track of our community vision. Now, the next issue is,
I'm-- I think the costs are so... I'm still not willing to go
with an addition. I'm sorry. I think we have got to avoid the
extra cost of additional construction on Mahoney, on the
exterior of Mahoney. I have started to
talk to some people in the community and look around at the different
public-private kind of approaches that you might take, and I think that we, if
we had more time, it's not a matter of just going at it with an
RFP, because even a few conversations give you so many different
approaches and options you can take. Uh, just throwing out a couple of them.
Some... One said, "Well, you know what?" And it fit in kind of with one of the
iterations tonight. What if you condominiumized it and sold
off a wing for private development
with, restrictions to all coordinate with city
uses and all this kind of stuff, and that revenue comes up front, and then it'll
offset your project revenue. Another one said another idea is to
take the theater wing and then part of the main wing and make that into more of
a profit-making enterprise in public hands that we don't use pub,
tax-exempt funding for. Another idea is
to have a developer who's experienced with all this stuff but who wants housing
and package in the existing s- this site, so
that y- you could say, "Okay, help us with Mahoney.
Get Mahoney the way we want, and you can build dense housing
on this site." So
I think we've got to just have a reset, and the dollars
have got to be involved from the beginning. The...
And I, I... That's the, the trouble with these things is
they're confusing, and the more-- and they're complicated, and the more that
we can, um... Now we separate out the public safety, let
that go separately, and then take more
time to focus on Mahoney without
losing track of our mission
and with looking to other options as a way to finance
parts of it so that it doesn't all rest on the shoulders of the
taxpayers.
Just in time for spring training, you bring the curveball.
Sorry. I know it-
So-
But I, I don't... I think... I mean, I'm sorry everybody if that sounds
like it's too confusing, but really look at, we're trying to do something for
the next hundred years, so let's just go slow and try to do our very
best to see what we can do for the people in our
community.
Okay. I w- I was gonna
t- summarize, but I won't summarize what you've said because we're all
intelligent humans, and we understand.
Who would like to speak next?
Councilor Scott. Thank you.
Um, so my, my
discussion or response is gonna involve the question number one.
Um, I, I, I am very in favor of
moving forward with Mahoney as sort of a city
center, arts, community
spaceI'm not opposed to having the
library be a new library space incorporated into the
building. I didn't love the idea of sort of new construction, but I'm
not either way. I, I do think we need to sort of
take a little bit more time
to think about Mahoney, and I'm not sure if that's sort of back to the Mahoney
committee, although I think they've done a huge amount of work, and I think there
has been a massive amount of public input and charrettes
and meetings and, you know, feedback that has
been provided. So I, I really think we have a fantastic
vision of Mahoney. I think we just
don't have the ability to put that into a referendum this
year. And my...
Kind of if I can summarize it as like a goal for, I guess it's
not a year, but a goal for a potential
something in 2027, is that we
think about
sort of
rethinking the funding and the revenue and the
partnerships for Mahoney that could support the work
that is needed there to potentially have a
city center. A- and going to the first
question, whether or not that incorporates city kind of hall and
offices, I think is a little bit TBD for me.
Um,
but I, I do think that we need to sort of reimagine Mahoney
in a reimagined way. And my other thought is that even
if this is something that we bring to voters with
something in '27, we're still looking
at three to five years before that could even
be sort of ready for
somebody to move in with some sort of function.
And so my thought is, again, thinking about
another location that is more sort of ready to lease
in the near term for city
offices, an office space that
is available, moving folks out of Hamlin
City Hall, assessor's office, repurposing those
buildings, thinking about that as part of the package for a longer term Mahoney
plan
makes sense in terms of a bigger, like
five-year plan here. Bless you. So
anyway, that, that's sort of my, that's my general
thought.
Now I'm gonna be accused of laughing at her.
I just admired the artfulness-
You do that often
... at which you manage to bless somebody while making your comment.
So anyway.
I do.
Next councilor.
Any other councilors want to, say, make
words?
I mean, I have lots of words.
Well, okay. I, I don't-
I'll-
If I was, like, running around as a facilitator, which I am not-
'Cause it might be speci-
Okay, yes.
First of all, I feel like we're in The Wizard of Oz.
Okay.
Twister after twister here. This is crazy.
I told you it was like this.
I mean, hold my goodness. Um,
yeah. I think that... I mean, obviously
nobody wants Mahoney saved more than me.
Um, I know you all say you do, but I really want Mahoney
saved because,
it's just, it's nostalgic for me. I mean, I, I went there, my family
went there, my mother went to high school there, and more importantly, I look out
my kitchen window and it's there, and I wanna see City Hall there.
So, I,
I just don't think we're ready for, any
referendum this year. I wanna ma- Again, I, I
think I'm hearing Ca- Carter say that,
she wants to move forward with the project, but
to make sure we get it right, and I think you're saying the same thing too, and
push it off. Correct? Is that, is that what I'm getting?
Yeah. That'd be one thing, yeah.
Okay. And I just, I'm not sure that we're ready for
it, besides all the other stuff that we have going on.
Um, we're in a little bit of financial crisis in the
city, my personal opinion. Um, so I think that
getting it right and making sure that we
look at all avenues for Mahoney to become,
whether the library, which we know that Jess wants dramatically in there, and
obviously, now Natalie think that's a good idea too.
I think that we just need to really make sure that we're getting it right because
of what Natalie said, the vision,
that we had in the beginning for all of this, and I think we've swayed
from that. So I think, yeah, taking our time, taking a step back, not
having a referendum this year, but possibly, bringing it
forward in '27, makes more sense to me than
anything.
Councilor Wa- thank you very much. Councilor Walker.
So I f- I feel like it's Christmas. Um, I, I don't think anyone's
surprised that I have been a huge fan of this project as it was originally
constituted, and have become increasingly frustrated as we've kind of
peeled back the layers, to get the cost down.
I understand the why behind the cost, I, I
truly do, but it was the vision of this project from the beginning
that really has inspired me. And Councilor West, I just thank you for
thinking so deeply about this and coming to the conclusion that you
did. Um, I also feel very heard because two weeks ago, I said, "I really..."
Or last week, I said, "I really think we need to separate out police and fire,
spend the rest of '26 thinking about what we can do with this
site, what with this project, and then moving to referendum in '27."
So I, I am adamantly in favor of
that. Um, the one thing that I, I do wanna say is
I have been thinking a lot in the last week about the
cost of this project overall. And again, as you all know, I am in favor of the
$194 million, so it's, it's not that I am afraid of it, but I
want to make sure that if we are saying we want to stick with Mahoney, and I'm not
saying I don't, but we nee- if we, if we are saying that this
project costs too much money to do, we need to make sure
that-
If we're being good fiscal stewards, we're not looking to save Mahoney at
any cost. And so I, I appreciate the conversation we're having tonight
because it sounds like we are being more thoughtful than let's spend $70
million just to save the building and get something in there.
You know, I wanna make sure that if we are spending a significant amount of money
to do this project, and it is for the next 100 years, that it is
indeed something that meets our needs now, meets our needs 10 years from now,
as well as 100 years from now. So I'm all in favor
with, with slowing down the process, with the goal of
'27. I really don't wanna move beyond 2027 because
I have been frustrated with the pace of this project since
2019. Um, and so I'd like to see us move forward.
I'd like to stick with Councilor West's, request to
keep this on the agenda as often as possible so that we can keep talking
about it, not with our, our resources here because that is not
necessarily the best use of your time.
Um, but just so that we don't lose sight of this, as we move forward with
all of the, the complicating issues that we have.
Um, and I'm, I'm
all in favor of anything that gets us the library that, that this
community deserves.
Thank you very much.
Councilor Pride?
Sure. Thank you, Mayor. Um, I,
I, I agree with most of what's been said.
I, I think it's kind of funny. The last couple times we've talked about
this I felt really defeated, and I think a lot of us have.
I mean, I think especially when we saw the $200 million price
tag, that was really deflating. And you know, if my, if my
body language conveyed that I had no taste for the project it was because
of both the, the very large price tag we were getting
and also I tend to be really empathetic and I
sort of absorb the feelings of the people around me and so I felt like we were all
feeling defeated and so I just felt really defeated.
But, and it's funny because, I think I
think, Councilor Walker felt the same way the other day 'cause we had a little
discussion about it and we're like, "Ah, I don't know what's gonna happen here,"
and
it's not really important exactly what we said but you know, it, it
just wasn't feeling good
moving in this direction. And
I just didn't see it possible because of the price tag and somewhat politically too
because there were folks saying, "Let's not do this," or, "Let's go a different
direction." Um, but now it feels better.
Um, it's interesting. I, I prayed a lot on this.
Um, I... So in some ways those
prayers were answered with some good positive let's do something
responses. Um, I'm glad that
we're gonna take time with it though.
I, I agree that we should,
I agree that we should, we should keep it off a year.
Um, so I guess the question is does council wish to proceed with a
scaled down project as proposed? I think the answer's kind of a no
'cause we wanna think a little more on this.
Is the council interested in engaging with a developer via an RFP process to
see if a public-private partnership at Mahoney is feasible?
I'm a yes and no, rather a no and a yes.
I think we don't want to engage with a developer quite yet, though
it might not be a bad idea to have some of those conversations.
I'm definitely interested in the possibilities of public-private partnership.
Um, you know, I think even if it means just having
places where our pl- where staff can, can buy food in
Mahoney where we're, and we're renting out that space,
that would be great and maybe locals would go in and eat
too and people visiting would go in and eat too.
Um-
Somebody's getting hungry.
Reopen the pizza joint.
Yes, exactly. Pizza joint right inside the Mahoney.
Uh, anyway, so yeah. I think, I think
let's try and get creative around the way we can do that public-private partnership
and I actually really, like Councilor West's idea of
potentially using library space for our sort of
back, back office stuff that, that isn't public
facing if, if that's necessary. Um, because
I, I do, I mean, I've been a fan of the library forever,
and I wanna see whether it's us committing to a renovation
of that building so they can get better use of it or us committing
to, putting it in Mahoney. I wanna commit
to doing something to improve the library.
So that's where I'm at.
Councilor Coleman. Thank you so much, Councilor Pride.
Yeah.
Well, I had always thought when we got scaling back it said no
library. Uh, first of all I wanna say I'm glad that we're
taking this slow and not looking at putting this on a referendum for
this year. Um, and when I was looking at the empty
space in the building I was thinking one of the things that the
library needs is more, 'cause they do, it's not just lend
books. They have classes. They, and they, they have no
space. And plus the Wi-Fi, it's an old building and
they just can't do that either there and so I was thinking
if it, if we had all of that space could the library use
it rather than just leasing it for,
because th- th- they can do as many programs as as many
space and they do a lot and,
it's free for a lot of their
programs. You know? They say, and their space is limited so
they... I'm, well,
so, we need, we need to help everybody, library,
city service, make this happen. I believe in the
vision. I'd like to see Mahoney be our city
center, and glad we're waiting.
We've all decided we need more time.
Thank y- coun-
I-
Thank you very much, Councilor Walker.
I just had one question, if I could add to our, our request for going
forward. Um, I want to make sure we also...
If we are slowing this down, if we're deciding to slow this down, I want to make
sure that we don't lose sight of the current needs that a lot of our
buildings have. And I know part of the reason that we got into such a dire
situation, and I'm sure our facilities manager can speak to this too, is
because we, we wanted something like this to happen.
Not, not the dire need, but the... We wanted to be able to
move forward with, like, a, a bright, shiny space.
Mm.
Um, and so I think, you know, probably 20 years ago, things
star- started slowing down in terms of upkeep, and I want to make sure that
if we're slowing down this project, we don't-
Neglect
... also not put the money into upkeep. It's...
You know, I'm sorry, my brain is starting to shut down.
Um, but-
I've-
Money. I want to make sure we keep spending the money that we need to spend on the
buildings, and not wait.
Okay.
And thank you.
Yes, I think you will find- ... some agreement, and I've already
heard o- one of our councilors say publicly how, that it would be important
to, during our budget discussions, start discussing how money is
put away for maintenance.
Yes.
So. Um,
all right. I'm not a- ... Oh, you have a question?
Sorry. Can I just add one more-
Mm-hmm
... thing?
Please.
I, I do think that it may be important for
us, and I'll
s- say the library is sort of the part of it that I think about here, but I also
think about city offices and
I ... I'm gonna make the hopefully not big mistake of bringing police and fire into
this, is that we have some contingency planning, in that if
we don't have a referendum passed next year for some component
here, that we have an idea of what we might do with the
library, what we need to do with City Hall, what we might need to do if we
do not get these passed, because this is a massive amount of money that we
have already agreed to put onto a referendum this year, and
is not gonna be, no money that we are considering in terms of
thinking about next year. So I just think in terms of
maintaining our facilities and moving forward, we need to think about the sort
of minimum contingencies of what we need to do as
an absolute minimum to keep our city services as excellent as they
are in the event that we don't also like
the dollars that we may be asking for next year.
So I just wanna think about that as part of this planning and the
thinking about our facilities, is that if we don't have exactly what we want
or if we don't get voter approval for a lot of the things that we may be asking
them for, we understand what we
may need to
fall back to. I, I don't like to use those words, but that's...
I just wanna put that on the table.
Thank you. I-
Sorry.
I don't, I... Do you feel like this process has forced
us already to do a little bit of that?
I feel like we have-
I'm just curious
... some big numbers out there for what we really-
Mm-hmm
... want, and that's fantastic, and we don't necessarily have
the, like, between $0... I know it's not $0.
Mm-hmm.
But between $0 and $200 million-
Mm-hmm. Okay
... I don't know that we have a great
middle ground.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm not gonna call it bare bones.
But-
You can call it the A1s and the et ceteras, but anyway.
Okay. Yeah.
Well, thank you very much. Um, Councilor West.
A- another thing I'd like to bring up is I'd like to ask staff
to, to
see what more we can do with Mahoney in the interim to try to
generate some revenue. I was surprised that we get
so little from the sports events that take ca- take place
there now. And, one thing I'd like to
specifically ask: Is it possible that we could run our
June and November elections in Mahoney?
I know that at the code, the gym part doesn't meet the code for
accessibility, but the other end, the, what's the,
cafeteria or whatever, is, I think, accessible or
relatively accessible, and it is a large space.
And if there's any way that that could function as a polling place, it would
just bring people in, they'd see the space, and it would be a
way to use it. So I'm interested in both, ways
to raise some small amount of revenue, and
also if there's any civic use at all that we could make of the space
in the interim.
I would like to speak to that, because every voting place
that we have currently
is a flat surface for, a, special needs, handicap, or
anything. Getting down to that cafeteria, I don't even know how people would-
It's... But at that end, it's level, isn't it?
No.
No, you're having to down steps-
Go downstairs
... at any door. You have to use steps to go down any door.
You do? All of them?
Yeah.
Okay, never mind.
So in every other polling place. Just-
I thought the cafeteria-
... want to point that out there, so
... part was level.
All right.
No. Sorry.
Well-
And a lot of the sports programs, just real quick, that
use the th- are, for a lot of,
children that, may not be, economically
advantaged.
Yeah. No, I'm not wanting to charge them money.
I'm just, I'd just like to say, is there people, creative
thinkers... Maybe there's portable ramps, maybe there's something, but some
way, because now Mahoney's gonna be vacant for a long...
It's gonna be vacant for quite a while.
If there's some way that we could get people in, use that
building in some possible way, I'd, I'd just like
some creative thinking to go into it.
And then if you come back and tell me no, okay. But just give it some thought.
Mm.
Tempted to mention the past discussion of the temporary shelter for which
we would've gotten state money, but I won't mention it, so.
Um, okay. Anyone
else? All right. I
have, I have one question. Um,
I guess I have, I... The will of the council is that we
are delaying-Further
thinking and decision-making, it seems, about this project.
We haven't put what any kind of date to what delay
means other than we will not be ready in June to put a
referendum. Um, so that is a, a little bit of a
concern or s- or just something that's out there that we might wanna try to
identify. Um,
the other thing is, does delay really mean
that we can't do any kind of an RFP process out there?
To me, an RFP is something that announces, "Our
city has discussed this. We have these goals.
We have these plans. We had one way that we were, could do
this, and we're open to other ideas." And it, it
may... I think it gives us an opportunity to kind of see what might
come in in the way of information, the way of building
public-private pa- partnerships, the way of maybe attracting
expertise that we don't even know is out there.
Um, I just, I'm a little hesitant about saying, "Nope, we're not
gonna try to do anything to ask other people to
come and join the party and bring ideas." Councilor West.
Uh, honestly, I believe that I've done enough research, speaking with people, to
say that that is not an appropriate approach at this point.
I re- I think I would really ask the council, if, Mayor,
if you want this to move forward fast, appoint a subcommittee
of Councilor Scott, who's had some experience with this, and myself,
and let us work with some of the people in the, that are in the field
that can give us some feedback about various ways to structure, because
otherwise the universal thing I have gotten is we're, the reason
why they're reluctant to work with government is they do not get, they get that
kind of amorphous direction-
Mm-hmm
... just like what you're telling me.
And I just know it would backfire. So I, I mean,
we've, we either keep talking it all through as seven of us when we
can and when you can fit it on the agenda and we figure it out, or you
delegate some people that have some authority to go out and talk to the people and
come back with report to the council.
Madam Mayor, can I speak to that?
Y- yes, Councilor West.
I-
Or Walker. Sorry. The Ws.
Um, I, I would propose putting that ask to
the Mahoney, if we're keeping the Mahoney committee and giving new
life to them, because I think that this is incredibly encouraging,
for that committee as well, that this could be something that maybe the funding
subcommittee could do. There's a mix of staff.
There's experts on that committee-
Yes
... that do this work. Um, I think this would be in their
purview, rather than it be two councilors.
Okay. Interesting. Um, I am not dumb enough to make
any more comments about the ideas that have been proposed.
I, I just think-
So I think everything is under advisement
... I'm gonna be persistent about this because I really want it to move forward.
I, I haven't been on the Mahoney committee, but I've,
and you and you have been on the Mahoney committee, and I think it would be
appropriate to let a couple other councilors be on this.
If we're gonna work with a couple people on the Mahoney Financing Committee,
that would be fine, but we have not gotten feedback from the Mahoney Financing
Committee the way we expected. When you look at that, the
original resolution and what we were supposed to get, if, if you want this
to move forward, let a couple of other councilors, you work on the
design parts of it and let us try to work on this part of it
with that committee, subcommittee.
Mayor, can I add something?
Yes, please.
I, I would just say I d- I don't think the Finance Committee has failed in
delivering. The, the order specifically said when the
final plan is brought back to the council in June, that is when a funding plan
would come. It did not say it would come in January.
Um,
so I, I would disagree that, that there's been a failure of the Funding Committee.
They, they've been doing the work that's been asked of them, and as
reported, they will have a final plan in June.
That will change now obviously, but I, I don't, I don't know if it's accurate to
say that they haven't done what they're asked to do.
And-
Councilor Walker
... to that, the Mahoney committee meets next week, and so
again, this is something that can be brought to them
expediently and they can start working on right away.
I, I think that, that we have this group of, of residents and experts and
staff that are together, that, that can be mobilized
quickly. They did a, a lot of work in a very short amount of time to
get us even to this place. So I, I have full faith that the people
that we have appointed to this could handle that task.
And I just, I'm not gonna put... I'm sorry to put you on the spot, but the
task and the working on to you is drawing up
the, a draft RFP. Is that what it is or what is it?
It's moving for... It's any work that-
Yeah
... that our fellow councilors would do as their own subcommittee.
We could then direct members of the Mahoney committee that we chose and
appointed for work like this
to do.
Okay. Councilor-
So we could decide.
All right. That's clearer. Thank you. Councilor Scott.
I know. I feel like we're
jumping into another agenda item, but I-
Well, one question I had was, is there any requirement that
ultimately if we were to bring in a private
party, that we would have to go through an RFP?
'Cause my thought is that an RFP is,
has challenges-
Mm
... and maybe directing the Mahoney committee to explore with
private potential
people, companies, that that might be part of
asking
them for that, that charge to explore that, that it doesn't have
to be an RFP. That, that is I think a very-
Correct. Correct
... like limited and specific process, and I wonder if-
It doesn't have to be an RFP if you're just trying to explore what the
options are. Um, even with-
But even with an RFP-
... even with an RFP, you wouldn't have to commit to, hey, if someone responded to
that, that's who you're going with for the whole ride.
But-
Yeah
... it could be, as, you know, Councilor West talked about, you know, in more
informal types of conversations.
I mean, these are, these are options that are out there.
There's a lot of things to look at.Retail space and renting
things out, probably not gonna generate a lot of revenue.
Lots of retail space right now vacant, so there's probably not gonna be much demand
for that. Um, and, and so I, I, I wouldn't want us to put too
many eggs in th-in this cart, that there's gonna be this big solution where the
developer comes in and, and covers a ton of the
cost. But there are things that we can look at if the council's interested in some
sort of model where the private sector's involved that could potentially reduce
cost. And-
Yeah
... it, it doesn't have to be an RFP to do that, though.
Yeah. No, and I guess that, that's where I-
It, it-
... am sort of going
... Craig's got experience too, so it-
Yeah
... you know.
Oh. Oh, sure. If you have something to add to this, please
do.
Well, I, I,
developers, there's a wide range of the mention of what we're
talking about. I think what the first step is the education piece
before we're going out to RFP. So
there's, there's processes that you could decide of going
as an RFQ to hire a partner to develop
the idea of an RFP, and with
no strings attached that that developer is gonna move forward.
There's education pieces that can be done.
The, there is the whole nuance of the, as we've
heard, the f-the Finance Committee had already talked about all the
nuances of, of not-for-profit,
for-profit, and balancing. And so if the charge of
the MC3 is to evaluate
other finance options, then the
education piece would be first, would be to invite
and have developers present to said committee
first, and then work towards an RFQ on
qualifications-
Oh, that's right
... to get them to help us move it
forward. And then if that group decides an RFQ
is appropriate and we, wanted to go
RFP, that's a, that's a few steps down the road.
But
anyway, hopefully that helps explain potentially the, a, a
method
to incorporate ... 'Cause you could, I, I guess the other
piece
briefly is
the most recent P3 that I worked on was at USM for their student
center and dorm, the Portland Commons building.
That was a P3 development that went down the road
of being a fully developer-run
project, and then it turned because the finances were
better for the University of Maine system to
finance it themselves. It was cheaper.
And then that developer team just pivoted from financing to
managing. And so there's different ways that projects can
evolve based on financing. So it can be a full
head P3 and divert if the numbers, don't work, and it can
be come back to a traditional bond, method.
So there's flexibility there.
Okay. At this time,
I would like to... What would I like?
Well, what I would really like to do sh- is go home and go
to bed. But- I think what I need to do
is ask the city manager if you feel you have what you
need.
Yes. So from, just to recap, we're sticking with Mahoney.
We're not looking at other options.
Uh, if, any sort of proposal would include the library, there
definitely will not be a November 26 referendum.
There seemed to be a preference, though, to shoot for something for 2027.
I presume then this means, not
just that the committee would continue its work on this, but the design team is not
prohibited from working on Mahoney.
It certainly won't be coming up with schematic design,
at this point for anything because we're not now shooting for that
November 26 timeline. But they will still be doing work
on, on, on the, the project to some
extent, including looking at, however you set it
up. Um, but as of right now, it would, it would default to the finance committee to
look at these other financing options and have that be,
a, a primary focus over the next, several months.
I, I think I got that right, but-
I think you did
... happy to hear-
And I think if, it looks to me that if we move to these
next items, there may be some other details that come
out that are useful to you.
Yep.
All right. Do folks feel that our, the workshop part of our discussion
is closed? All right. So let's move to action on
old and new business. Um,
I'm not forgetting that we add an item, but I think it can go more toward the end
than the beginning. Let's stick with this topic.
Could you read the first order, order 155?
Order 155-25-26, amending order number
34-24-25 to eliminate reference to the library being part of
the Mahoney project, postponed from March 5th, 2026, and
passes requires majority vote.
Questions?
Can I ask a procedural question?
Please.
I don't know that we're in favor of this order, and I'm
not sure if-
If it needs to be-
... if I move to-
Yeah
... not move it.
Withdraw from the agenda.
Sorry, withdraw.
Yeah.
Is that what I should do?
You, if you-
Withdraw from the agenda.
Okay. I move to withdraw order 155-25-26 from
the agenda.
I'll second.
Second.
Qu- Discussion? Public comment?
No.
Oh. All right.
It's a procedural motion.
Oh, I'm sorry. Sorry. All right. Well, I guess
when, we're ready to vote. All in favor?
Got it. Thank you. Unanimous. That is done.
Next order, please.Order
1562526, amending order
2122425 to direct staff and design team to seek
locations other than Mahoney for a new police station, postponed from March 5th
2026. Pass requires majority vote.
Adopted and amended.
Can I also-
I, I-
... move to eliminate this from the agenda?
You could.
Except we've made no other-
We'll do... Oh, Councilor West.
Uh, suggestion would be to move to amend, move to pass, then move to
amend to remove the, just to
re- so it only removes the police station.
And doesn't tell the city manager to look for another location, because we already
found one.
Yeah. And doesn't... Yeah.
Yeah. That's the order.
I mean, maybe let's just withdraw it.
Yeah. I just-
We'll take care of it another time when we-
This seems a little-
... head to arrest
... it seems like it's something that we can bring back if we need to.
Yeah.
All right. So-
Move to withdraw it
... move to withdraw. Second?
I'll second that.
Really, Councilor? Thank you so much.
Councilors all in favor?
That's unanimous. Next order please, Madam City
Clerk.
Order 1572526, amending order
1352425 to update the charge of the Mahoney City Centre Committee,
postponed from March 5th '26. Pass requires majority vote.
Madam Mayor?
Councilor Walker.
I'm just, procedurally, is this similar or is this different?
Because we are not removing, we just voted we're not removing
Mahoney from the, the library from Mahoney,
but we are removing reference to the police station.
So is this, is this the same?
I, I would say this has even changed more.
Yeah.
I think you definitely need-
How about we remove this?
... to remove police, but-
Right
... this is als- this order says...
You, you just gave guidance at a workshop, but the order says we shall bring a
referendum-
Oh, to the June
... to you in June.
Thank you.
So you, you'll need to update that.
All right.
Yeah.
That's why I asked the question. Thank you.
We do.
Um, any other councilors, any comments here?
Questions.
Any questions?
This is council questions.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Any questions?
Okay.
Public comment.
So okay. Well, I just was seeing if somebody was still trying to remove it, but
doesn't seem that way. All right. Do you-
I guess I do have a question
... what-
So what, what will this say? So what, what are we changing this to say?
So, so, so I, so obviously you want to keep the library in there now because you've
decided to keep that, so that part wouldn't be relevant, so you wouldn't...
You, you'd want to pass this order, but without that language.
Uh, and then you would want to add changing the timeline from November
26 to a November 27 referendum.
Mm-hmm. And remove the police.
Keep and remove the police, right.
And, so and we're also not changing the charge of the committee, they're still
working forward under the o- the, charter that or order or
request that we had.
No, I mean, nothing you've decided that would change it otherwise-
Okay. Thank you
... unless you wanted to do any other changes.
Nope, Natalie has it. She does it all.
Councilor West.
I'm gonna move to withdraw from the agenda. It can come back next time.
This isn't urgent.
Does... Okay, so if we remove it, then it remains as
is, which seems somewhat sloppy.
For two weeks?
I think we can just-
Well
... vote.
Two weeks?
Then we bring it back and let's bring back one that's really right.
Isn't that in three weeks?
What does it say, the agenda? I, what I'm trying to find is the or- the
ballot measure, the bond measure.
Um, I didn't... Yeah, I heard a
half-hearted move to remove without a
second. So
unless that's becoming fully throated, I think we're gonna hear public
comment. What?
Can, can I just ask where exactly does it say about the bond measure?
That's where I'm, what I'm having trouble finding in here.
Sure. I'm gonna bring up the order here.
I want to make sure it's accurate.
In the original order.
See if I can share it. Project
background.
I don't see it.
Uh, why is this taking me to a video?
Can I ask a clarifying question in the meantime?
Oh, it's in there. Okay.
Please. I-
Yeah, I did read that.
Only clarifying question.
Yes.
In the previous discussion, we did give some guidance
on city staff in the
vein of Mahoney moving forward.
Right. Section. So-
I recognize that's a little bit different than the charge of the Mahoney
committee, but I wonder if there is enough direction
through that discussion of the Mahoney committee-
All right. Hang on, everybody. I can't hear two things at
once, and out of respect, you might want to listen to your fellow councilor.
So keep going.
Well, we did discuss a lot of direction around Mahoney, but
I, I recognize that's a different agenda item than what the charge for the Mahoney
committee is. So I'm just wondering if
we do have enough direction to go forward, and tabling this for two
weeks
might actually make sense.
Right. But-
Sorry, I guess they're sort of-
Tabling-
... conflating these topics
... or postponing it and getting rid of it altogether are two different
things. Should we postpone again?
Councilor West, what are you thinking?
It, it, it really needs a significant amount because
there's... The, the timeframe for what the com-
committee's gonna do is different, is gonna be different.
Yeah.
So-
It has changed tonight, so I think-
Mm-hmm
... if you postponed it, there'd be other...
Yeah.
All right. So should we postpone to either a date
certain or just say the next, the, which meeting?
When-
To a date certain
... both of those-
Yeah, April 2nd-
April 2nd
... will be your next meeting. Yep.
2nd.
7th.
Yeah.
And we're n- we're not doing budget at that point?
We can still revisit this?
We'll have a budget presentation at that point-
But we, we'll still be able to-
... but there's, there'll be other items on the agenda too, yeah
... okay. So it sounds like if someone wants to motion to postpone to
April 7th. Councilor Walker?
I make a motion to postpone this item to April 7th.
Do we have a second?
Councilor West. All right. All in
favor?Yay. We did
it. You guys are great. We're getting there, team.
All right. We already worked on order 167, so let's go
to o- order 168,
please.
Order 168, 2526, authorizing the city manager to enter
into a purchase and sale agreement for 279
Main Street property and appropriate funds to execute the transaction.
Passage requires majority vote.
Okay. Do we have questions from councilors?
Did you all want to see a test fit at all of, um... Craig has a test fit.
I- is that all helpful to you all, or are you good with
seeing a test fit on-
A test-
... the site of the, of the-
Oh
... police station on the site-
Well, if it's-
... that he's come up with
... easy to throw it up there, Craig, it might be in-
interesting.
Yeah.
Um-
Be interesting.
Meanwhile, if anyone's gonna make public comment on this, be
ready.
Oh, that's a nice picture.
I know.
Let me go back to... Uh, so again, Craig Payper from
SMRT. Um,
the... We did a, a very quick study
of evaluating the 279 Main Street,
site to see, with the
police station
as proposed in its current program and all the elements required,
how would it fit on the site. The,
test fit proves that it does fit. This will not
be what we build in the end. Um, it is just a first pass.
We actually met with the chief and, earlier today
to, to talk about, pluses, minuses.
We also want to, reflect the comprehensive plan
direction for this area. This was...
didn't have that hat, so we wanna make sure that we're
respectful of the plans of the comprehensive plan.
But the question, does it fit? Yes.
There are some... Our biggest concern is any changes to
Cash Corner intersection, and how much
we would, be affected by the realignment of
Broadway and Main, which we,
want to be prudent about. That could affect the layout,
but we feel pretty confident that even with an
encroachment potentially, that we certainly can
accommodate, the, the site as, as
proposed.
Question?
Oh, yes, I had a question. I j- I just had a very quick question.
The front row of parking spots right on,
Main Street, they're absolutely...
Well, actually, they're already there. Never mind.
Oh.
I thought you were adding.
Yeah, so-
Yeah, never mind
... again, this is, uh-
I'm noticing
... w- with the public, side of police station,
there is a public aspect, and so we wanna make sure that there's
safe parking. We also have the-
Mm-hmm
... secure yard in the back. So the balance of where that
entrance is and, you know, making sure it's easy to
find the front door is always important.
Um, in this concept, the, the one
negative that we are exploring, but it would...
the solution could be once we have, understanding of the
change in, the circulation patterns, is this
drawing showing just one entrance and one exit-
Mm-hmm
... for police, which is not ideal.
Um, there are ways that we can have an exit
only, to, to, leave the station,
but we want to sort of wait till we have little, maybe a little better
definition on roundabouts and how that would work.
But we're-
Okay.
This just used where the entrance and exit is today at the, for the
Walgreens.
Did I see a question over there?
I was just gonna ask, can you leave the storm drain in place with that layout?
Um, this layout relocates it. Um,
but
it's, it's accommodated in this layout under the
parking. So it just moves from, where it is
today
towards Broadway.
Okay. Any... Councilor Scott.
Um, I don't need an answer to this today, but as a citizen of
South Portland, I think it would be helpful
at some point to make sure that we have a strong answer of not being able to reuse
any aspect of the site and building that's currently
there. And so...
Yeah. Uh, the, the construction type for retail
does not lend itself to the requirements of a police station.
So there's no aspect of reusing parts of the
building, from just
the, the requirements to be a, a,
uh- ... to meet all the requirements for a police station.
There are... We have the maintenance facility, which
isn't needed at the level of a police station, but
Walgreens, the, the portion that we could theoretically use for part of
the building would be the maintenance, but the Walgreens is right in the middle.
It's not on the edge or the side where we could repurpose it for
maintenance and tho- those parts of it.
But for the police station itself, it's really
not, an option.
All right. Any other councilors have questions?
All right. We'll open this up for public comment now.
Thank you. Comment, comment, public
comment? All right. I'm not gonna be begging.
Public comment is closed on this item. Thank you.
Councilors, what is your wish and will?
Yes.
Oh, Councilor West. Yes.
Move for passage.
Yes. Thank you. Do we have a second? Councilor Walker, are you seconding?
Second.
Thank youCouncillor West.
Uh, just so it seems like the best use of the s-
professional consultants is just to move ahead on the public safety side
while we're
trying to figure out con- more concepts about
the Mahoney.
Yeah.
Is that where we are kind of in terms of the use of the pr- the skills? Yeah.
Okay. Good. Thank you.
Councillor Walker?
Nothing to add.
Any councilors wish to add any items?
Or excuse me, add any conversation, discussion?
Nope, you're looking good. All right, all in
favor? That is a unanimous vote. Thank
you very much. We're moving right now
to... We're flying, you guys.
Um, I'm gonna put the, the Pine Street one at the very, just before
acceptance of gifts and donations.
Okay.
Ordinance.
So let's go with ordinance eighteen. Thank you.
Ordinance number eighteen twenty-five twenty-six amending Chapter fourteen
licensing regarding article marijuana establishments.
First reading, passage requires majority vote.
All right. Questions, councilors? No.
Public comment on this item?
Milan, are you doing something? You're...
He's presenting the item.
This is fourteen, right?
Oh, yeah. Okay.
You're just...
No, you're cut
off.
Uh,
so Mayor, if I may, the two items you have coming up next are sort of
interrelated. I can provide one presentation now.
Yes, you certainly may.
So I'll be speaking about chapter twenty-seven now under this item for
fourteen. Um,
wait.
This is a, a new laptop, so I just need a few seconds to install
this screen
share.
Okay, so, there is a map I have in the slides.
I've, printed off a hard copy that you each have, but
for the members of the audience, you'll see it up on the screens in a moment, and
we can also zoom in if we need to. Um, it's not
critical to the understanding what's being proposed tonight, but it just helps put
things into perspective, so I'll walk you through that.
Um, you have an application here for a zoning text amendment, and it comes
paired with a chapter fourteen amendment.
Chapter fourteen is our licensing chapter.
They're coming together because this is an amendment that affects marijuana,
storefronts, and, all those storefronts require licenses as
well, so we had to do, both together.
Uh, this is an applicant's proposal, so we're processing this on behalf of the
applicant. It's already been to the planning board. The applicant is Rosebud LLC.
They are, uh... There we go. Thank
you. Uh, they are here this evening, can answer questions as well.
Um, they made this proposal. Uh, both our corporation counsel and planning staff
worked with them on refining it so we can make sure that it's sort of acceptable
and meets at least the boundaries of the, the law, and then you have,
sort of a policy case being made before you tonight.
This is a rare, somewhat rare circumstance where you might have seen the
planning board memo. We normally write a memo recommending to the planning board,
"Here's sort of a, a pretty clear path forward in why there's
consistency with zoning and whatnot." In this case, this really isn't a matter
of consistency with the comprehensive plan or any kind of statute or whatnot that
you have to find, you know, verification for.
The question for you right now is, the conversation that the, the
prior council had in twenty twenty-one about an over-concentration concern about
storefronts established some restrictions, and they're looking for a little bit of
a relief with those restrictions.
So it's really, council, you had a position that you took in twenty
twenty-one. Do you feel like this still keeps in the spirit of that but
provides some reasonable flexibility?
So that's really the rub here, and it's, it's gonna be council discretion on, on,
whether you're comfortable moving forward.
Uh, you did, or this did go to the planning board, as I said.
They did, recommend unanimously that you approve this as consistent
with the comprehensive plan. I'll summarize their motion in a minute.
I know we're dealing with the new Diligent software, so you may not have had a
chance to go through their minutes just yet.
Here's what led to this proposal. Our applicant was licensed in twenty
nineteen, got their approvals, went through the process exactly
as you should. I believe they were, the first, if, if not one of the
first, to apply under our new regulations for
marijuana. They've been operating successfully.
We have no issues of, you know, concerns or non-compliance.
Their licenses have been re-upped every time they've needed to be.
They've, they've kept to what they were required to do.
This is what their storefront looks like, just the floor plan here.
It's about seventeen hundred square feet. It's in the LB zone.
Um, nothing miraculous about this.
It's a storefront that sells a particular product that's licensed and regulated at
the state and local level, and they're looking to take a component of that interior
space and convert it, into a facility that can
retail, a different licensed product.
So one thing that is unique about marijuana, is
that unlike other land uses, we treated
a product line that requires a certain license type as an
entirely different land use. It would be like us
saying, a liquor store that vends
wine is entirely different as a physical thing
than a liquor store that vends alcohol or beer or something that's
not wine. Um, and that's just basically a choice that was
made. Uh, it's a brand-new industry that was emerging.
The state had all kinds of complex regulations around licensing.
Land use s- language wanted to marry up with the way that
the state was licensing these things in the early days,
and that has changed so many times since, the legislation first, first
passed.But what we're ending up with is, an
ordinance, and this is common, but we have an ordinance that
says if you're gonna be vending an adult-use grade
marijuana product, you have to have a adult-use license and you have to
be called an adult-use retail store.
And you can look and feel and operate and have the same impacts, if you
choose to sell medical licensed product.
Um, it was fine. The businesses operated under that,
environment. There's some administrative and logistical burdens that came with it,
but we were moving forward. Over time, I think the state,
in realizing how these things actually operate, relaxed a lot of those
licensing regulations and they now allow co-location.
That means two, license types within the same facility.
Um, and a lot of this stuff is just sort of
broken down and people have started treating these more like the land uses that we
might in that liquor scenario just call it a liquor store that sends-- sells
multiple types of products. Uh, most recently, Portland ratcheted
down its land use regulations and got more to that notion of just you're a
marijuana storefront, you can sell different license types.
You have to be licensed in accordance with the product you're selling, but the
store and the physical space and the im-impact on the ground,
doesn't change if you're vending different types.
Uh, so just reminder, back in 2021, early
2021, the council had expressed a concern because we were the
first, if not among the first in the state to open up, the city
to marijuana storefronts and other businesses getting
established. Um, and as a result, we had many businesses come in
and try to, set themselves up. Many storefronts were,
lease purchased and these businesses sought out approvals.
Um, it was so successful, if you will, that we got
to a point where there was too many in the council's view and
over-concentration and council directed staff to present you with some
options on how we control for that over-concentration.
We did sort of a multiple layers of revisions.
The key ones that are pertinent tonight is that we took a look at the map where we
allowed storefronts. Storefronts are stores that sell adult
use, medical, and, the, dispensary
class businesses. So those three are the storefront category.
We removed storefronts from the zones listed here, and you'll notice
LB is singled out there. That's this applicant is in the LB zone.
So that zone no longer allows storefronts to be established,
period. In the zones that remain and all throughout the
city, we also established for the first time a thousand-foot buffer for minor
serving businesses. So think of, I think the example at the time was like a
karate studio for kids and then mental and health, and
social health services businesses.
They had to be a thousand feet from stores.
And then the stores used to have to be three hundred feet from one another.
So you'll see in your map those red dots, some of them are quite close.
They were compliant at the time with the three hundred, and we've since then
increased it to two thousand. So you'll see those big, kind of black
dashed lines. That's the two thousand foot separator. So we expanded it.
And the reason why we did all of this is we basically wanted to create a scenario
where you couldn't establish new storefronts in the city.
I think there was one remnant area, where it was technically possible to put in
a new storefront.
And it, it had the effect we wanted.
It stopped, storefronts from-- new storefronts from being established and
locked in the ones that were in the pipeline or that had already been built.
This was one of the key things council directed.
We didn't wanna penalize somebody who had invested thousands to try and set up a
business, and then we were in the midst of changing regulations.
We wanted to allow them to see the process through.
The additional thing that s-council did is they said,
we recognize that medical and adult use are quite similar, and
it's pretty laborious to have to go back to the planning board every time you wanna
take a storefront and just sell a different product line.
So you can go to staff and get an administrative approval to just convert.
But you can't do that in any of those zones listed up there because they
categorically do not allow storefronts, and they wanna see them go.
If you can't make it in the business you initially proposed, you just
need to vacate the store.
So, the impacts since the 2021 ordinance adoption, again, we
haven't had new,
new stores proposed. This applicant's in the LB and they cannot
convert, in whole or in part any of their
retail space to a different product line.
Uh, as I said, the main office cannabis policy has updated their regulations.
They don't have a concern with the model that this applicant is asking
you to, provide with the ordinance changes.
Specifically, the changes update some of the definitions because state
law has changed, so we wanna get consistent with those.
It's an incomplete update, but it's what the applicant needs in order for--
to address what they're proposing.
Staff will come back to you in our miscellaneous ordinance amendments and do the
rest of these housekeeping items.
The substantive requests here is under
1902K1. That is a s-- The amendment
there is to say any of the marijuana business
types, a cultivation facility and storefronts
in, manufacturing, I think also has this situation where
there's both an adult use and a medical type.
Any one of those can convert from one to the other.
Adult-- If you're adult use today, you can convert to medical.
That is okay, and if you wanna do that, you don't have to respect the
separator distances, those two thousand feet, the one thousand feet.
You're okay to do that. If you've already been established, you can just convert to
the type that you want. Um, and you don't have to comply
with the zoning restriction of the time.
So if you happen to be in LB, you can do your full conversion, because
you're already a storefront or you're already a cultivation facility in that
area. And they introduce a new subsection K,
two that is very similar, and it just allows
not the scenario of total conversion, but what this applicant is technically
seeking is to take a part of their business and allow it to be
selling adult use or medical use. The two types
within one facility, co-location.In
chapter 14, what's necessary is that we get the same definitions that we're
using in 27. And then
this is the sort of the fifth layer of dealing with
over-concentration. The council at the time said, we
want to
r*****t down the number of stores over time.
And one of the ways we're going to do that is if you're,
as we're adopting these ordinances, in the process of setting up a store, we're
going to let you see through that process and establish that
store. But you've got to do that thing that you said you were going to do
and nothing more. If you want to convert, you can't if you're in one of those zones
that don't allow it anymore. In addition to that, if you're the operator today
and you want to sell your business and move on or you're changing
operators, that means you have to get a new license.
If you lapse in taking an active license and
apply a new license or you just don't renew your
license, that will also wipe away your land use
approval. And there's really no other land use that I'm aware of that would
allow, that does that, where the license and the lapse in the license
eliminates a land use right.
Council
has the ability to do that. It's been an ordinance.
It does set up some challenging scenario types that the applicant has raised.
For example, let's say that the applicant intends to
operate the business, doesn't want to change anything, but they have a medical
emergency. They're indisposed for 30 days or they're just thinking about
something else. One day of lapse and they lose their entire business and their
livelihood. If they happen to be traveling and are unable to
communicate by email or whatever, that one day lapse, it's
completely gone. There's no alternatives.
There's no leniency there. So what they're asking for
is that they respect the lapse or the idea
that if you don't re-up on your license, you sort of let your
right go. But they are seeking a 90-day grace period that if it
lapses on whatever date and there's a new license application
within 90 days, that they can keep going with it.
So that's the
leniency, I guess, asked for in the Chapter 14 license amendment
request. The zoning component, as you
know, has to be evaluated against the comp plan.
As I mentioned, there's really not much in the comp plan that's
applicable here. This is a council policy call.
One thing that I should point out is that before the
2021 amendments, there was a pretty
lenient marijuana ordinance that we had.
And the council adopted that ordinance and found that ordinance consistent with the
comp plan. These changes are somewhat rolling back the
2021 restrictions and getting back to that original ordinance.
So in a way, the council has
already found this version of things consistent, at least with the plan.
That doesn't mean that the council has to find it
in the interest of the community. But I just want to point that out.
I don't think this is a comprehensive plan consistency issue.
It's a policy matter for the council.
And somewhat reinforcing that is the state's rule changes where they've also
expressed if local municipalities want to do this kind of thing, they can.
This is the map that you have before you.
If it helps just to kind of put things into perspective, I think maybe Council
of Pride, you may have been the only one at the time in 2021 when we were looking
at this map. I know you're all familiar with the storefronts in
town. The red dots here show the storefront
categories. Not in that
way. The black dots were
cultivation facilities. That's the other types.
And so you can get a sense of like where that overconcentration concern was coming
up. This applicant's business is kind of a bit of a unique
one. It doesn't have much around it. It's all the way down at the Scarborough line.
You can see my cursor there. It's at the end of Main Street.
So that's the 818 Main Street location.
You can see what you would want to look for if you were a marijuana storefront
operator and you were trying to look and establish yourself in South Portland.
You would want to say, okay, the green areas are the only zones that
allow the storefronts. And is there any portion of the green area that
doesn't have one of these circles overlapping it?
And really the answer is nowhere because we didn't want to create properties.
That one exception is down here
kind of in the deep pocket of Cash Corner
in the I zone where you technically could have a storefront located.
But otherwise the other storefronts, buffers kind of edge you out
everywhere. And this is the scenario the applicant is looking for
some relief.
When we looked at this request, I think we were hopefully pretty
transparent about the council's desires back in 2021, the
concern about overconcentration and why we added on all these layers of
restrictions. That's there for a reason. It was on purpose.
And we really wanted to see the overconcentration come down.
Where from a staff side, we
also wanted to be clear that their proposal had a unique case that the
council might want to hear is that they keep the same number of
stores. They keep the same square footage of retail space
dedicated to marijuana type product.
They cannot do any expansions because they're still legally nonconforming.
And so this really, the ordinance changes you have before you are
very narrow to this idea of do you feel uncomfortable with
allowing existing businesses to have a diversified business model,
which technically probably would allow them to survive longer.
And that does maybe potentially run up against your concerns about
overconcentration and wanting to bring them, bring the number
down overall. It doesn't guarantee the businesses are going to close.
It just means that they can't do as much as the state would potentially
allow them to do under the licensing mechanisms.
Here's your planning board motion. It was to recommend approval.
They found it consistent with the comp plan, but they also wanted to mentionUh,
they did not feel it exacerbated the over-concentration concern because the
amendments only affect existing approved establishments, do not add new
establishments or expand storefronts.
So that- that's all I have to present on, both of the two
items on Chapter 2714 amendments.
I'm happy to answer questions, and the applicant may have more to
add.
Madam Mayor, I got a question.
Yes, please.
A couple.
Thank you.
So basically they wanna double-dip, right?
Is that what we're getting at?
They wanna be... I believe this applicant wants to take that store, take three
hundred square feet, and be able to vend a product that requires a different
license.
Okay. And how do we go from a one-day grace period to a 90?
So they can run 93 months without a license?
No, no. Uh, they have to have a license in order to operate, but
they won't use... lose their land use right, to
open and run that store if they apply within 90 days of when the
expiry was. They always have to have an active license in order to be able to
operate. But if, for instance, they expire on April
1st, they happen to be traveling for two months of that period, or
they happen to be dealing with some emergency or whatever, and they don't get the
license in time for the clerk to put it on your agenda,
there's been a, I think, a couple of cases where, because of the holiday
scheduling and the council's agendas, it's gotten really tight.
I think we even had to squeak it in very, kind of uncomfortably to make sure
somebody met that timeline because it's so, such a cliff to fall off of if you
don't get it. Uh, anyway, the applicant would be able to say, "Look, I've,
I've been in the hospital for two months.
I know my elapsed on April 1st, but I'm here on April 15th.
My business has been closed. I wanna get my license." If you have y-
an agenda on May 1st, they could still get their
license, and they haven't lost their site plan approval and their ability to
operate that business. What would happen in today, if they didn't come to
you before April 1st, is that their little red dot
would disappear from this map, and if they wanted to reactivate
it, they would have to find a spot that's not covered by
one of these bubbles. And the answer would be, it can't be there where they've
invested their, their business and literally can't be anywhere else except that
cash corner location.
So you were here-
They'd have to start everything new.
You were here in 2021, right?
Correct. Yeah.
So you helped set up these rules?
Yes.
And you had concerns back then?
No, I did not have concerns back then because the council's prerogative
was that we had a concentration concern, and we wanted to find ways to r*****t it
down, and we gave all the options. I didn't participate in the license one,
technically. I think our corporation counsel at the time led the licensing piece.
I do have concerns, and I think I expressed them clearly back then.
This connection of licenses with land use is odd,
and it's only in the realm of marijuana, but you technically have the
ability to do that, and the council at the time wanted to do that, and we
could, and it did have the effect of being pretty restrictive.
So you have no concerns about this stuff at all?
This really isn't a question for me.
It's about-
Well, you just-
You're the-
You, you're the staff that gives us recommendation-
Okay
... so I'm asking you. I think you're a pretty bright guy.
What I can tell you is that we have not seen, apart from one
business in downtown Mill Creek, and that was,
back in the 2021 period. Uh, our office, and
I'm including the code enforcement office, hasn't received concerns about
storefronts with issues of, you
know, concerning activity, concerning individuals.
Some of the boogeymen that were associated with the industry at the time that we
were, you know, first opening up regulations to this,
they're paying their bills. They're keeping their stores clean.
They've updated the storefronts.
I don't personally partake in the product, but
I don't know, people haven't really raised a concern beyond that 2021 period
when it's been, was proposed. So
I'm not seeing nuisance complaints.
I'm not seeing direct impacts that I can document on the
community. Beyond that, it's really a, you know, a
council call on whether this feels like too many.
All right. Thanks.
Councilor John.
Can I just clarify, on, on the license grace
period, that applies because the
land use is not necessarily allowed
anymore. You still have a license to operate.
You're sort of grandfathered in, but if you, if you lapse on the license
and you're outside of the land use allowed
land use, then you lose the ability to operate that business.
That's the sort of disconnect you're saying between the license and the land use,
and I think that's a relatively rare situation, where your, your
license to operate in a certain place
may have changed because of
the zoning.
So there's sort of an extra grace period for the license of the
business. Am, am I understanding that correctly?
Yeah. So the, in zoning, when you're given
an approval from the planning board, and it says you can operate a restaurant, a
manufacturing facility, whatever, it runs with the land.
Yeah.
It doesn't run with the individual. Business owners can change.
Employees can change. It's, runs with the land, and it's entitlement, and you
buy that right when you buy a property.
You get to operate that business, and sometimes it's legal nonconforming.
But that's a right that you have,
and licenses run with people and the operators.
And so it's routine that
licenses are on a completely different schedule, and restaurants need to get
re-licensed, and if you lose your license for your restaurant, it doesn't mean
that you, you now have to go back to the planning board to justify establishing a
restaurant there. In marijuana, and in part I think solely
because of this over-concentration concern, we said we, we want it to dis-
disappear, everything, all of the rights.
Uh, so this is a direct feedback from licensing.
The operator, the individual, now
completely can vaporize the land use right.
Um, it, it's very unique.
Thank you.
Other counselors with questions
Okay. Do we have comment on... I'm tempted
to make it either of the items. Am I allowed to do that?
It's up to you.
Sure.
No object.
On six or seven, any comment?
No. Oh, yes? Come on, hurry on
down.
Good evening. Thank you for your time. My name's Patrick Memoris.
I'm actually speaking on behalf of my father, Peter Memoris, who unfortunately
couldn't be here tonight, so thank you for your time again.
My name is Peter Memoris. I am 73 years old and have been
co-owner of Beach Boys Clean Cannabis here in South Portland for the past
seven years. For the past 35 years, I have worked as a tax
accountant. Over that time, I have witnessed countless small businesses
respond and adapt to changes in rules and regulations enacted by
local, state, and federal governments.
In that same spirit, the city planner and staff have skillfully and thoughtfully
proposed an amendment that will benefit existing businesses, those
that have been responsible operators and have contributed positively to the fabric
of this community. At the same time, they have been careful not to
alter the original intent of the current ordinance, which does not and
will not permit any new stores in these zones.
Rather, this amendment simply allows existing businesses to adapt to
evolving regulations just like any other business.
Last week, the planning board voted unanimously to endorse the proposal and
forward it to this council for enactment.
We strongly support this recommendation to this council.
Thank you in advance for your consideration. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Any... Yes? One. Thank you.
How's it going? Tom Memoris. Um, I know it's been a long night, so I'll be quick.
Uh, my name is Tom Memoris, and I'm here tonight representing Rosebud LLC, the
applicant for this proposed zoning text amendment.
To provide some background, my involvement with South Portland dates back to
2017 when I spoke at the main town managers association meeting
as an industry expert on the nascent marijuana industry.
This led to an introduction to the assistant town manager, Joshua Rennie, who
invited me to help develop the city's initial marijuana ordinance.
I collaborated with planning staff for 18 months on this ordinance, which was
successfully passed in 2018. Rosebud LLC sub- sub-
subsequently became the first licensed marijuana facility in South Portland after
completing the full site plan review process.
We have been proud to operate on Main Street for the past seven years, and have
established ourselves as an important part of the community.
In 2021, the city implemented additional restrictions on new stores due to
concerns about oversaturation of retail spaces, resulting in many
zones being deemed non-permitted for marijuana establishments.
An unintended consequence of these necessary changes was that most existing
previously approved marijuana stores, including mine, were rendered
non-conforming. This status is particularly challenging given that
businesses like ours had invested hundreds of thou- hundreds of thousands of
dollars just two to three years earlier to establish retail spaces in
locations the city had designated. For example, Seaweed Co.
completed a year-long site plan review with South Portland in 2019
for a brand new multi-million dollar building on Running Hill Road specifically for
this marijuana retail use. A single state regulatory change has the
potential to put them out of business with this current ordinance, resulting in a
total loss of their investment in that project.
This brings me to the zoning text amendments before you this evening.
For the past three months, I've collaborated with planning staff to develop a
strategy that specifically addresses the unintended non-conforming
status of existing stores following the 2021 changes.
The goal is to grant increased flexibility to these already approved establishments
without reopening the zones to a prol- proliferation of new stores.
Furthermore, the constant evolution of state marijuana laws,
combined with the current ordinance in place, puts my business at risk of permanent
closure due to future regulatory change.
This outcome would be detrimental to myself, my employees, and the patients we have
served in this community for over seven years.
Essentially, what is in front of you tonight is an update to our ordinance.
There will be no new stores, and the existing stores cannot ex- expand their
footprint. This gives stores in town a chance to adapt to the many new rule changes
that have been enacted over the past five years, and will continue to be passed in
the upcoming years. These proposed amendments have the universal support of all
existing marijuana stores in South Portland.
We strongly urge the council to follow the planning board's recommendation and
approve this proposed text amendment.
We have consistently demonstrated ourselves to be responsible business operators,
and we look forward to continuing to serve the community for many years to come.
Thank you for your time tonight.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Public comment on
the item is closed. What is the wish of the council?
Counselor Walker.
Move for passage.
And that is for ordinance number 18.
Yes.
Do we have a second?
Do we have a second? Counselor Coleman. Thank you.
Counselor Walker?
I think this is a, a smart move. It allows for bus- businesses to
be more agile, while maintaining the spirit that a prior
council has set in terms of restricting the overall numbers of
businesses. I support the 90-day, grace
period because I also feel like COVID taught us that, you know, things
can shift dramatically quickly, and this, again, allows for
agility much,
which is much needed for businesses in our community. Thank you.
Thank you, Counselor Walker. Who was... Counselor Coleman, you were the second.
And my only question was 90 days, and that was
explained because of
scheduling.
And so I'm, yes, supporting.
All right, so we have that for the ordinance
as written.
Do you have a question?
Do we have a question or comment? Yes.
I have a quick question. Mon, can you tell me if we
pass ordinance number 18 but then
reject ordinance number 19, the zoning text amendment, is
there anything that would be incongruent?In the law.
Is there something that's in the licensing piece?
'Cause, you know, I, I'm, I guess I'm okay with the 90
days, but I, I'm still... Well, I'll explain why, but,
I'm hesitant about the zoning change.
So if I were to support this first ordinance in chapter
14 and then we were n- and but
the ordinance change in chapter 27 wasn't voted on, would there
be something, a problem, an inconsistency that we'd have to deal
with?
No.
Okay.
Uh, it's all definitional updates to just reference
the, state statute, and then it gets to the
actual substantive piece, allowing that 90-day extension.
So 14 sort of stands alone.
Okay.
You can act without worrying about the other one.
Then I appreciate the, the definitional changes.
I like when the law matches what the law is, um
and the, what the, and the language is what it's supposed to be.
So, and I, I'm okay with a, a 90-day,
grace period, so I can support
this.
All right. Any other councilor comments? All right.
Um, let's have a vote. All in
favor?
That is... Oh, it is a unanimous vote?
Sure.
Okay.
Why not?
Thank you.
Choke it up.
All right. Madam City Clerk,
could you please read Ordinance 19?
Ordinance number 192526, amending Chapter 27, zoning
regarding marijuana performance standards.
Article Section 271902, first
reading, passed requires majority vote.
All right. Thank you. Do any councilors feel that you need to ask
questions? Okay. Um, anyone to make public
comment? I don't see public comment on this.
It's closed. What is the wish of the council?
Move for passage, Counselor Walker.
A second? Do... Counselor Scott is
seconding. Counselor Walker.
I think I've stated my vote.
You said your thing.
Yes.
Okay. Counselor Scott.
Yeah, I just add, I think this adds a reasonable amount of business
flexibility.
Okay. Nice and succinct. Anyone else?
Counselor Pratt.
Yeah, I'm, I'm not gonna be supporting this.
And, and I, I do feel bad because your business is on the
other side of town, but this ordinance is gonna be everywhere.
So imagine we're talking about the East End, and it was one of
those places that is, like, right there within a red or
other circle that, you know, like, really close to a
school. Um, like, like those three dots right
there. If one of them was changing their kind of
dispensary, then this will allow them to do that, and I would prefer
that they can't, that, that they have to figure out how business is gonna work the
way they are, or they have to close.
Because while it is true that I think the principal reason
of amending this ordinance was to keep us where we
were, there was suf- there was a, there was a talk on the council of,
"Well, we're also hoping to decrease it." And, and let me tell you,
the number of people that came up to me after, who have come up to me since
this passed and said, "Man, we have too many marijuana places in, in
town," and I tell them, "Well, we have ordinances that limit that," and
they thank me for that, but they're, they're like, "It's a little too
late." Um, so
I'm... Yeah, I mean, I guess I'm, I'm gonna be consistent with my previous
vote, which was to enact this ordinance.
And, I really feel like, you know, there is
a concentration in various places, and I do feel bad for you guys because you're
not one of them. But if we vote for this for you, it applies to everyone, and I
really don't want it to apply to everyone.
Okay. Any other councilors wanna make any comments
about this?
I don't see any.
All right. All in favor of that zoning change.
So that, if I could do math, is five.
And opposing? Two opposed.
So the motion do- the zoning needs five.
It passes.
Oh, it's first read. It just needs majority.
Well-
Just passes.
Oh, really? Okay. First read. All right.
We- Thank you very much, councilors.
We had that item that we put on, and is there a
way to read that, please?
So order number 1142526, Conservation Commission,
district at large C for a term that expires March 3rd,
2029, passed requires a majority vote.
Wait. I'm, I'm-
This is
the one that has already been moved. Would you like to add yours?
I thought we were talking about the Pine Street permit thing.
We do still need to add that.
Okay, so that was... Okay, so it's two of them. Thank you.
I'm so sorry.
You're okay.
Okay.
This was moved from the consent calendar by Councilor
Matthews.
All right.
So I just asked this item to be, added this evening to allow the
incumbent, Chris Payne, to continue his work on the Conservation Commission
and the commission's representative on the comprehensive plan to see the
committee's work through. So it's-
Yes
... simple as that.
All right. So you're putting that forward. Do we need seconds?
Yeah.
And it's, it's the whole regul- it's all regular? All right.
Well,
I, I would like to second that actually, thank you, since I've seen his
work, and he's a, a member that's done a lot
of work on the subcommittees.
Is this then we're gonna open it up then to public-
Open it up. Oh, ugh. All right. Who am I and where am I?
You-
All right. Councilor's questions. No.
Yes.
Sorry. This is just, this is for your at-large appointee for the
Conservation Commission-
Yeah
... and the comprehensive plan? Okay.
Yeah.
Just making sure.
All right.
Thank you.
Does anyone have public comment about the matter of Chris Payne's
appointment?I do not see any. And now I'll be
speaking in a strange accent because I'm entirely losing my mind at this point.
Move for passage.
Thank you.
Second.
Thank you, Counselor Pride. Counselor Matthews.
No, all good.
Counselor Pride.
No comment.
All in favor? That is a unanimous vote.
Now, what do we do about the Easter egg hunt?
Ah. An item came forward
this week. Um, Mayor Tipton asked that it be added to the
agenda this evening so a decision can be made on a temporary street
closure. The item specifically that we are
referencing is a Pine Street Easter egg hunt
event that closes the street between Pierce and Maple
from 9:00 AM to 1:00 PM on April 4th.
I think that about does it. Counselors, do you have questions?
No questions. Does anyone want to speak about this from the public?
I don't see anyone. Counselors, what is your will
and wish?
Move for passage.
Move for passage, Counselor Pride.
Do we have a second? Are you seconding, Counselor West?
Second.
Thank you.
Counselor Pride.
Love me a good Easter egg hunt.
Oh, okay.
Um, I think it's a great community event, lots of people show up, and I'd like
it to be able to continue.
Counselor West.
I, I'm voting for it this year. I do think we need to look at
what streets we allow to close and when.
Pine is a pretty main street. It's an access to some restaurants.
It's Easter and, these people have it, they have an
expectation, let them go ahead. But then we need to talk about
our, our standards.
Thank you. Counselor Scott.
I just want to relay a citizen's request that the timeframe in which
the street closure is allowed is respected by the
local community and not extended, and that if
that can be made clear to, the
applicants, that would be very helpful.
Yeah.
Any other comments on this item? Counselor Coleman.
We did get, one- more than one email, stating
that
they were not compliant yet in, in clearing and opening it up by
1:00,
and that there was a history that the street wasn't closed and it was done
in backyards and that. So I agree with
Counselor West. We need to look at that and to see if they are
making sure that they are respecting the 1:00 PM and
9:00 AM closure.
Thank you, Counselor Coleman. All right.
Um, can... All in favor.
I think we were there.
Did you skip public comment?
Did I?
And they vote and they-
No, no, I didn't.
That's right.
All right. Were you... Hello?
They didn't-
You too.
Sorry, yes.
You were, you were in favor, I assume.
How are you-
I never handed something-
Okay
... my Corporation Council to sign. I apologize.
All right. Yes. It-
Okay, so he's zero.
All right. Unanimous vote for our permanent record.
Thank you very much. We're now on Order
169.
Order 169, acceptance of gifts and donations.
We have one donation that was made.
Thank you very much.
This is a library donation in the amount of
$50.
Okay. Well, grateful for every- everything we can get.
Um, thank you. Any questions? Any
comments?
What is the wish of the council? I think Counselor West is moving for
passage.
Move for passage.
Second.
Seconded. And any discussion
items? Thank-
I'll just, I'll just say that, you notice this was a donation that was a birthday
present in honor of a friend, and that's a great idea.
We should try to encourage that.
It's a fun thing to do, that's for sure. All right.
All in favor? Yes, that is unanimous.
Okay. Citizen discussion, part two.
Is there anyone who wants to give us any public
comment? Public comment
is closed. Thank you. Communication from the city manager,
please.
It's late and I'll pass.
Thank you, Mr. City Manager. Um, but we
do love hearing from you, and you always bring us important information.
Counselors, round robin. Anyone? Anyone?
I, can I... Real quick.
Yes, Counselor Walker. Thank you.
I know that he just left, but I just, I wanted to, if you could pass on my
thanks, for his very heartfelt words tonight, and
I, I so respect, admire, and appreciate that he, he stood
up and, and addressed the community.
I will do that.
Thank you.
Thank you. Seconded.
Um, all right. Counselors, I think we need a motion to
adjourn. Thank you, Counselor Walker.
Thank you all counselors involved. I think it's unanimous.
Good night, everybody. Thank you so much.
We did it.
Don't forget your books.
All right